
[Illustration: Halbert Glendinning Invoking The White Lady]

[Illustration: WAVERLEY NOVELS ABBOTSFORD EDITION]

             THE WAVERLY NOVELS
                    by
              SIR WALTER SCOTT.

                 Complete
             In Twelve Volumes

                 Printed
       from the latest English Editions
                Embracing
 The Author's Last Corrections, Prefaces, and Notes.


              THE MONASTERY.


INTRODUCTION--(1830.)

It would be difficult to assign any good reason why the author of
Ivanhoe, after using, in that work, all the art he possessed to remove
the personages, action, and manners of the tale, to a distance from
his own country, should choose for the scene of his next attempt the
celebrated ruins of Melrose, in the immediate neighbourhood of his own
residence. But the reason, or caprice, which dictated his change of
system, has entirely escaped his recollection, nor is it worth while
to attempt recalling what must be a matter of very little consequence.

The general plan of the story was, to conjoin two characters in that
bustling and contentious age, who, thrown into situations which gave
them different views on the subject of the Reformation, should, with
the same sincerity and purity of intention, dedicate themselves, the
one to the support of the sinking fabric of the Catholic Church, the
other to the establishment of the Reformed doctrines. It was
supposed that some interesting subjects for narrative might be
derived from opposing two such enthusiasts to each other in the path
of life, and contrasting the real worth of both with their passions
and prejudices. The localities of Melrose suited well the scenery of
the proposed story; the ruins themselves form a splendid theatre for
any tragic incident which might be brought forward; joined to the
vicinity of the fine river, with all its tributary streams, flowing
through a country which has been the scene of so much fierce
fighting, and is rich with so many recollections of former times,
and lying almost under the immediate eye of the author, by whom they
were to be used in composition.

The situation possessed farther recommendations. On the opposite bank
of the Tweed might be seen the remains of ancient enclosures,
surrounded by sycamores and ash-trees of considerable size. These had
once formed the crofts or arable ground of a village, now reduced to a
single hut, the abode of a fisherman, who also manages a ferry. The
cottages, even the church which once existed there, have sunk into
vestiges hardly to be traced without visiting the spot, the
inhabitants having gradually withdrawn to the more prosperous town of
Galashiels, which has risen into consideration, within two miles of
their neighbourhood. Superstitious eld, however, has tenanted the
deserted groves with aerial beings, to supply the want of the mortal
tenants who have deserted it. The ruined and abandoned churchyard of
Boldside has been long believed to be haunted by the Fairies, and the
deep broad current of the Tweed, wheeling in moonlight round the foot
of the steep bank, with the number of trees originally planted for
shelter round the fields of the cottagers, but now presenting the
effect of scattered and detached groves, fill up the idea which one
would form in imagination for a scene that Oberon and Queen Mab might
love to revel in.  There are evenings when the spectator might
believe, with Father Chaucer, that the

  --Queen of Faery,
  With harp, and pipe, and symphony,
  Were dwelling in the place.

Another, and even a more familiar refuge of the elfin race, (if
tradition is to be trusted,) is the glen of the river, or rather
brook, named the Allen, which falls into the Tweed from the northward,
about a quarter of a mile above the present bridge. As the streamlet
finds its way behind Lord Sommerville's hunting-seat, called the
Pavilion, its valley has been popularly termed the Fairy Dean, or
rather the Nameless Dean, because of the supposed ill luck attached by
the popular faith of ancient times, to any one who might name or
allude to the race, whom our fathers distinguished as the Good
Neighbours, and the Highlanders called Daoine Shie, or Men of Peace;
rather by way of compliment, than on account of any particular idea of
friendship or pacific relation which either Highlander or Borderer
entertained towards the irritable beings whom they thus distinguished,
or supposed them to bear to humanity.  [Footnote: See Rob Roy, Note,
p. 202.]

In evidence of the actual operations of the fairy people even at this
time, little pieces of calcareous matter are found in the glen after a
flood, which either the labours of those tiny artists, or the eddies
of the brook among the stones, have formed into a fantastic
resemblance of cups, saucers, basins, and the like, in which children
who gather them pretend to discern fairy utensils.

Besides these circumstances of romantic locality, _mea paupera
regna_ (as Captain Dalgetty denominates his territory of
Drumthwacket) are bounded by a small but deep lake, from which eyes
that yet look on the light are said to have seen the waterbull ascend,
and shake the hills with his roar.

Indeed, the country around Melrose, if possessing less of romantic
beauty than some other scenes in Scotland, is connected with so many
associations of a fanciful nature, in which the imagination takes
delight, as might well induce one even less attached to the spot than
the author, to accommodate, after a general manner, the imaginary
scenes he was framing to the localities to which he was partial. But
it would be a misapprehension to suppose, that, because Melrose may in
general pass for Kennaquhair, or because it agrees with scenes of the
Monastery in the circumstances of the drawbridge, the milldam, and
other points of resemblance, that therefore an accurate or perfect
local similitude is to be found in all the particulars of the picture.
It was not the purpose of the author to present a landscape copied
from nature, but a piece of composition, in which a real scene, with
which he is familiar, had afforded him some leading outlines. Thus the
resemblance of the imaginary Glendearg with the real vale of the
Allen, is far from being minute, nor did the author aim at identifying
them. This must appear plain to all who know the actual character of
the Glen of Allen, and have taken the trouble to read the account of
the imaginary Glendearg.  The stream in the latter case is described
as wandering down a romantic little valley, shifting itself, after the
fashion of such a brook, from one side to the other, as it can most
easily find its passage, and touching nothing in its progress that
gives token of cultivation. It rises near a solitary tower, the abode
of a supposed church vassal, and the scene of several incidents in the
Romance.

The real Allen, on the contrary, after traversing the romantic ravine
called the Nameless Dean, thrown off from side to side alternately,
like a billiard ball repelled by the sides of the table on which it
has been played, and in that part of its course resembling the stream
which pours down Glendearg, may be traced upwards into a more open
country, where the banks retreat farther from each other, and the vale
exhibits a good deal of dry ground, which has not been neglected by
the active cultivators of the district. It arrives, too, at a sort of
termination, striking in itself, but totally irreconcilable with the
narrative of the Romance.  Instead of a single peel-house, or border
tower of defence, such as Dame Glendinning is supposed to have
inhabited, the head of the Allen, about five miles above its junction
with the Tweed, shows three ruins of Border houses, belonging to
different proprietors, and each, from the desire of mutual support so
natural to troublesome times, situated at the extremity of the
property of which it is the principal messuage. One of these is the
ruinous mansion-house of Hillslap, formerly the property of the
Cairncrosses, and now of Mr. Innes of Stow; a second the tower of
Colmslie, an ancient inheritance of the Borthwick family, as is
testified by their crest, the Goat's Head, which exists on the ruin;
[Footnote: It appears that Sir Walter Scott's memory was not quite
accurate on these points. John Borthwick, Esq. in a note to the
publisher, (June I1, 1813.) says that _Colmslie_ belonged to Mr.
Innes of Stow, while _Hillslap_ forms part of the estate of
Crookston. He adds--"In proof that the tower of Hillslap, which I have
taken measures to preserve from injury, was chiefly in his head, as
the tower of _Glendearg,_ when writing the Monastery, I may
mention that, on one of the occasions when I had the honour of being a
visiter at Abbotsford, the stables then being full, I sent a pony to
be put up at our tenant's at Hillslap:--'Well.' said Sir Walter, 'if
you do that, you must trust for its not being _lifted_ before
to-morrow, to the protection of Halbert Glendinning: against Christie
of the Clintshill.' At page 58, vol.  iii., the first edition, the
'_winding_ stair' which the monk ascended is described. The
winding stone stair is still to be seen in Hillslap, but not in either
of the other two towers" It is.  however, probable, from the
Goat's-Head crest on Colmslie, that that tower also had been of old a
possession of the Borthwicks.] a third, the house of Langshaw, also
ruinous, but near which the proprietor, Mr. Baillie of Jerviswood and
Mellerstain, has built a small shooting box.

All these ruins, so strangely huddled together in a very solitary
spot, have recollections and traditions of their own, but none of them
bear the most distant resemblance to the descriptions in the Romance
of the Monastery; and as the author could hardly have erred so grossly
regarding a spot within a morning's ride of his own house, the
inference is, that no resemblance was intended. Hillslap is remembered
by the humours of the last inhabitants, two or three elderly ladies,
of the class of Miss Raynalds, in the Old Manor House, though less
important by birth and fortune. Colmslie is commemorated in song:--

  Colmslie stands on Colmslie hill.
  The water it flows round Colmslie mill;
  The mill and the kiln gang bonnily.
  And it's up with the whippers of Colmslie.

Langshaw, although larger than the other mansions assembled at the
head of the supposed Glendearg, has nothing about it more remarkable
than the inscription of the present proprietor over his shooting
lodge--_Utinam hane eliam viris impleam amicis_--a modest wish,
which I know no one more capable of attaining upon an extended scale,
than the gentleman who has expressed it upon a limited one.

Having thus shown that I could say something of these desolated
towers, which the desire of social intercourse, or the facility of
mutual defence, had drawn together at the head of this Glen, I need
not add any farther reason to show, that there is no resemblance
between them and the solitary habitation of Dame Elspeth Glendinning.
Beyond these dwellings are some remains of natural wood, and a
considerable portion of morass and bog; but I would not advise any who
may be curious in localities, to spend time in looking for the
fountain and holly-tree of the White Lady.

While I am on the subject I may add, that Captain Clutterbuck, the
imaginary editor of the Monastery, has no real prototype in the
village of Melrose or neighbourhood, that ever I saw or heard of. To
give some individuality to this personage, he is described as a
character which sometimes occurs in actual society--a person who,
having spent his life within the necessary duties of a technical
profession, from which he has been at length emancipated, finds
himself without any occupation whatever, and is apt to become the prey
of ennui, until he discerns some petty subject of investigation
commensurate to his talents, the study of which gives him employment
in solitude; while the conscious possession of information peculiar to
himself, adds to his consequence in society. I have often observed,
that the lighter and trivial branches of antiquarian study are
singularly useful in relieving vacuity of such a kind, and have known
them serve many a Captain Clutterbuck to retreat upon; I was therefore
a good deal surprised, when I found the antiquarian Captain identified
with a neighbour and friend of my own, who could never have been
confounded with him by any one who had read the book, and seen the
party alluded to. This erroneous identification occurs in a work
entitled, "Illustrations of the Author of Waverley, being Notices and
Anecdotes of real Characters, Scenes, and Incidents, supposed to be
described in his works, by Robert Chambers." This work was, of course,
liable to many errors, as any one of the kind must be, whatever may be
the ingenuity of the author, which takes the task of explaining what
can be only known to another person. Mistakes of place or inanimate
things referred to, are of very little moment; but the ingenious
author ought to have been more cautious of attaching real names to
fictitious characters.  I think it is in the Spectator we read of a
rustic wag, who, in a copy of "The Whole Duty of Man," wrote opposite
to every vice the name of some individual in the neighbourhood, and
thus converted that excellent work into a libel on a whole parish.

The scenery being thus ready at the author's hand, the reminiscences
of the country were equally favourable. In a land where the horses
remained almost constantly saddled, and the sword seldom quitted the
warrior's side--where war was the natural and constant state of the
inhabitants, and peace only existed in the shape of brief and feverish
truces--there could be no want of the means to complicate and
extricate the incidents of his narrative at pleasure. There was a
disadvantage, notwithstanding, in treading this Border district, for
it had been already ransacked by the author himself, as well as
others; and unless presented under a new light, was likely to afford
ground to the objection of _Crambe bis cocta_.

To attain the indispensable quality of novelty, something, it was
thought, might be gained by contrasting the character of the vassals
of the church with those of the dependants of the lay barons, by whom
they were surrounded. But much advantage could not be derived from
this. There were, indeed, differences betwixt the two classes, but,
like tribes in the mineral and vegetable world, which, resembling each
other to common eyes, can be sufficiently well discriminated by
naturalists, they were yet too similar, upon the whole, to be placed
in marked contrast with each other.

Machinery remained--the introduction of the supernatural and
marvellous; the resort of distressed authors since the days of Horace,
but whose privileges as a sanctuary have been disputed in the present
age, and well-nigh exploded. The popular belief no longer allows the
possibility of existence to the race of mysterious beings which
hovered betwixt this world and that which is invisible.  The fairies
have abandoned their moonlight turf; the witch no longer holds her
black orgies in the hemlock dell; and

  Even the last lingering phantom of the brain,
  The churchyard ghost, is now at rest again.

From the discredit attached to the vulgar and more common modes in
which the Scottish superstition displays itself, the author was
induced to have recourse to the beautiful, though almost forgotten,
theory of astral spirits, or creatures of the elements, surpassing
human beings in knowledge and power, but inferior to them, as being
subject, after a certain space of years, to a death which is to them
annihilation, as they have no share in the promise made to the sons of
Adam. These spirits are supposed to be of four distinct kinds, as the
elements from which they have their origin, and are known, to those
who have studied the cabalistical philosophy, by the names of Sylphs,
Gnomes, Salamanders, and Naiads, as they belong to the elements of
Air, Earth, Fire, or Water. The general reader will find an
entertaining account of these elementary spirits in the French book
entitled, "Entretiens de Compte du Gabalis." The ingenious Compte de
la Motte Fouqu? composed, in German, one of the most successful
productions of his fertile brain, where a beautiful and even
afflicting effect is produced by the introduction of a water-nymph,
who loses the privilege of immortality by consenting to become
accessible to human feelings, and uniting her lot with that of a
mortal, who treats her with ingratitude.

In imitation of an example so successful, the White Lady of Avenel
was introduced into the following sheets. She is represented as
connected with the family of Avenel by one of those mystic ties,
which, in ancient times, were supposed to exist, in certain
circumstances, between the creatures of the elements and the
children of men. Such instances of mysterious union are recognized
in Ireland, in the real Milosian families, who are possessed of a
Banshie; and they are known among the traditions of the Highlands,
which, in many cases, attached an immortal being or spirit to the
service of particular families or tribes. These demons, if they are
to be called so, announced good or evil fortune to the families
connected with them; and though some only condescended to meddle
with matters of importance, others, like the May Mollach, or Maid of
the Hairy Arms, condescended to mingle in ordinary sports, and even
to direct the Chief how to play at draughts.

There was, therefore, no great violence in supposing such a being as
this to have existed, while the elementary spirits were believed in;
but it was more difficult to describe or imagine its attributes and
principles of action. Shakespeare, the first of authorities in such a
case, has painted Ariel, that beautiful creature of his fancy, as only
approaching so near to humanity as to know the nature of that sympathy
which the creatures of clay felt for each other, as we learn from the
expression--"Mine would, if I were human." The inferences from this
are singular, but seem capable of regular deduction. A being, however
superior to man in length of life--in power over the elements--in
certain perceptions respecting the present, the past, and the future,
yet still incapable of human passions, of sentiments of moral good and
evil, of meriting future rewards or punishments, belongs rather to the
class of animals, than of human creatures, and must therefore be
presumed to act more from temporary benevolence or caprice, than from
anything approaching to feeling or reasoning. Such a being's
superiority in power can only be compared to that of the elephant or
lion, who are greater in strength than man, though inferior in the
scale of creation. The partialities which we suppose such spirits to
entertain must be like those of the dog; their sudden starts of
passion, or the indulgence of a frolic, or mischief, may be compared
to those of the numerous varieties of the cat. All these propensities
are, however, controlled by the laws which render the elementary race
subordinate to the command of man--liable to be subjected by his
science, (so the sect of Gnostics believed, and on this turned the
Rosicrucian philosophy,) or to be overpowered by his superior courage
and daring, when it set their illusions at defiance.

It is with reference to this idea of the supposed spirits of the
elements, that the White Lady of Avenel is represented as acting a
varying, capricious, and inconsistent part in the pages assigned to
her in the narrative; manifesting interest and attachment to the
family with whom her destinies are associated, but evincing whim, and
even a species of malevolence, towards other mortals, as the
Sacristan, and the Border robber, whose incorrect life subjected them
to receive petty mortifications at her hand. The White Lady is
scarcely supposed, however, to have possessed either the power or the
inclination to do more than inflict terror or create embarrassment,
and is also subjected by those mortals, who, by virtuous resolution,
and mental energy, could assert superiority over her. In these
particulars she seems to constitute a being of a middle class, between
the _esprit follet_ who places its pleasure in misleading and
tormenting mortals, and the benevolent Fairy of the East, who
uniformly guides, aids, and supports them.

Either, however, the author executed his purpose indifferently, or
the public did not approve of it; for the White Lady of Avenel was
far from being popular. He does not now make the present statement,
in the view of arguing readers into a more favourable opinion on the
subject, but merely with the purpose of exculpating himself from the
charge of having wantonly intruded into the narrative a being of
inconsistent powers and propensities.

In the delineation of another character, the author of the Monastery
failed, where he hoped for some success. As nothing is so successful a
subject for ridicule as the fashionable follies of the time, it
occurred to him that the more serious scenes of his narrative might be
relieved by the humour of a cavaliero of the age of Queen Elizabeth.
In every period, the attempt to gain and maintain the highest rank of
society, has depended on the power of assuming and supporting a
certain fashionable kind of affectation, usually connected with some
vivacity of talent and energy of character, but distinguished at the
same time by a transcendent flight, beyond sound reason and common
sense; both faculties too vulgar to be admitted into the estimate of
one who claims to be esteemed "a choice spirit of the age." These, in
their different phases, constitute the gallants of the day, whose
boast it is to drive the whims of fashion to extremity.

On all occasions, the manners of the sovereign, the court, and the
time, must give the tone to the peculiar description of qualities by
which those who would attain the height of fashion must seek to
distinguish themselves. The reign of Elizabeth, being that of a maiden
queen, was distinguished by the decorum of the courtiers, and
especially the affectation of the deepest deference to the sovereign.
After the acknowledgment of the Queen's matchless perfections, the
same devotion was extended to beauty as it existed among the lesser
stars in her court, who sparkled, as it was the mode to say, by her
reflected lustre. It is true, that gallant knights no longer vowed to
Heaven, the peacock, and the ladies, to perform some feat of
extravagant chivalry, in which they endangered the lives of others as
well as their own; but although their chivalrous displays of personal
gallantry seldom went farther in Elizabeth's days than the tilt-yard,
where barricades, called barriers, prevented the shock of the horses,
and limited the display of the cavalier's skill to the comparatively
safe encounter of their lances, the language of the lovers to their
ladies was still in the exalted terms which Amadis would have
addressed to Oriana, before encountering a dragon for her sake. This
tone of romantic gallantry found a clever but conceited author, to
reduce it to a species of constitution and form, and lay down the
courtly manner of conversation, in a pedantic book, called Euphues and
his England. Of this, a brief account is given in the text, to which
it may now be proper to make some additions.

The extravagance of Euphuism, or a symbolical jargon of the same
class, predominates in the romances of Calprenade and Scuderi, which
were read for the amusement of the fair sex of France during the
long reign of Louis XIV., and were supposed to contain the only
legitimate language of love and gallantry. In this reign they
encountered the satire of Moliere and Boileau. A similar disorder,
spreading into private society, formed the ground of the affected
dialogue of the _Praecieuses_, as they were styled, who formed
the coterie of the Hotel de Rambouillet, and afforded Moliere matter
for his admirable comedy, _Les Praecieuses Ridicules_. In
England, the humour does not seem to have long survived the
accession of James I.

The author had the vanity to think that a character, whose
peculiarities should turn on extravagances which were once universally
fashionable, might be read in a fictitious story with a good chance of
affording amusement to the existing generation, who, fond as they are
of looking back on the actions and manners of their ancestors, might
be also supposed to be sensible of their absurdities. He must fairly
acknowledge that he was disappointed, and that the Euphuist, far from
being accounted a well drawn and humorous character of the period, was
condemned as unnatural and absurd.  It would be easy to account for
this failure, by supposing the defect to arise from the author's want
of skill, and, probably, many readers may not be inclined to look
farther. But as the author himself can scarcely be supposed willing to
acquiesce in this final cause, if any other can be alleged, he has
been led to suspect, that, contrary to what he originally supposed,
his subject was injudiciously chosen, in which, and not in his mode of
treating it, lay the source of the want of success.

The manners of a rude people are always founded on nature, and
therefore the feelings of a more polished generation immediately
sympathize with them. We need no numerous notes, no antiquarian
dissertations, to enable the most ignorant to recognize the sentiments
and diction of the characters of Homer; we have but, as Lear says, to
strip off our lendings--to set aside the factitious principles and
adornments which we have received from our comparatively artificial
system of society, and our natural feelings are in unison with those
of the bard of Chios and the heroes who live in his verses. It is the
same with a great part of the narratives of my friend Mr. Cooper. We
sympathize with his Indian chiefs and back-woodsmen, and acknowledge,
in the characters which he presents to us, the same truth of human
nature by which we should feel ourselves influenced if placed in the
same condition. So much is this the case, that, though it is
difficult, or almost impossible, to reclaim a savage, bred from his
youth to war and the chase, to the restraints and the duties of
civilized life, nothing is more easy or common than to find men who
have been educated in all the habits and comforts of improved society,
willing to exchange them for the wild labours of the hunter and the
fisher. The very amusements most pursued and relished by men of all
ranks, whose constitutions permit active exercise, are hunting,
fishing, and, in some instances, war, the natural and necessary
business of the savage of Dryden, where his hero talks of being

  --"As free as nature first made man,
  When wild in woods the noble savage ran."

But although the occupations, and even the sentiments, of human beings
in a primitive state, find access and interest in the minds of the
more civilized part of the species, it does not therefore follow, that
the national tastes, opinions, and follies of one civilized period,
should afford either the same interest or the same amusement to those
of another. These generally, when driven to extravagance, are founded,
not upon any natural taste proper to the species, but upon the growth
of some peculiar cast of affectation, with which mankind in general,
and succeeding generations in particular, feel no common interest or
sympathy. The extravagances of coxcombry in manners and apparel are
indeed the legitimate and often the successful objects of satire,
during the time when they exist. In evidence of this, theatrical
critics may observe how many dramatic _jeux d'esprit_ are well
received every season, because the satirist levels at some well-known
or fashionable absurdity; or, in the dramatic phrase, "shoots folly as
it flies." But when the peculiar kind of folly keeps the wing no
longer, it is reckoned but waste of powder to pour a discharge of
ridicule on what has ceased to exist; and the pieces in which such
forgotten absurdities are made the subject of ridicule, fall quietly
into oblivion with the follies which gave them fashion, or only
continue to exist on the scene, because they contain some other more
permanent interest than that which connects them with manners and
follies of a temporary character.

This, perhaps, affords a reason why the comedies of Ben Jonson,
founded upon system, or what the age termed humours,--by which was
meant factitious and affected characters, superinduced on that which
was common to the rest of their race,--in spite of acute satire, deep
scholarship, and strong sense, do not now afford general pleasure, but
are confined to the closet of the antiquary, whose studies have
assured him that the personages of the dramatist were once, though
they are now no longer, portraits of existing nature.

Let us take another example of our hypothesis from Shakspeare himself,
who, of all authors, drew his portraits for all ages. With the whole
sum of the idolatry which affects us at his name, the mass of readers
peruse, without amusement, the characters formed on the extravagances
of temporary fashion; and the Euphuist Don Armado, the pedant
Holofernes, even Nym and Pistol, are read with little pleasure by the
mass of the public, being portraits of which we cannot recognize the
humour, because the originals no longer exist.  In like manner, while
the distresses of Romeo and Juliet continue to interest every bosom,
Mercutio, drawn as an accurate representation of the finished fine
gentleman of the period, and as such received by the unanimous
approbation of contemporaries, has so little to interest the present
age, that, stripped of all his puns, and quirks of verbal wit, he only
retains his place in the scene, in virtue of his fine and fanciful
speech upon dreaming, which belongs to no particular age, and because
he is a personage whose presence is indispensable to the plot.

We have already prosecuted perhaps too far an argument, the tendency
of which is to prove, that the introduction of an humorist, acting
like Sir Piercie Shafton, upon some forgotten and obsolete model of
folly, once fashionable, is rather likely to awaken the disgust of the
reader, as unnatural, than find him food for laughter. Whether owing
to this theory, or whether to the more simple and probable cause of
the author's failure in the delineation of the subject he had proposed
to himself, the formidable objection of _incredulus odi_ was
applied to the Euphuist, as well as to the White Lady of Avenel; and
the one was denounced as unnatural, while the other was rejected as
impossible.

There was little in the story to atone for these failures in two
principal points. The incidents were inartificially huddled together.
There was no part of the intrigue to which deep interest was found to
apply; and the conclusion was brought about, not by incidents arising
out of the story itself, but in consequence of public transactions,
with which the narrative has little connexion, and which the reader
had little opportunity to become acquainted with.

This, if not a positive fault, was yet a great defect in the Romance.
It is true, that not only the practice of some great authors in this
department, but even the general course of human life itself, may be
quoted in favour of this more obvious and less artificial practice of
arranging a narrative.  It is seldom that the same circle of
personages who have surrounded an individual at his first outset in
life, continue to have an interest in his career till his fate comes
to a crisis. On the contrary, and more especially if the events of his
life be of a varied character, and worth communicating to others, or
to the world, the hero's later connexions are usually totally
separated from those with whom he began the voyage, but whom the
individual has outsailed, or who have drifted astray, or foundered on
the passage. This hackneyed comparison holds good in another point.
The numerous vessels of so many different sorts, and destined for such
different purposes, which are launched in the same mighty ocean,
although each endeavours to pursue its own course, are in every case
more influenced by the winds and tides, which are common to the
element which they all navigate, than by their own separate exertions.
And it is thus in the world, that, when human prudence has done its
best, some general, perhaps national, event, destroys the schemes of
the individual, as the casual touch of a more powerful being sweeps
away the web of the spider.

Many excellent romances have been composed in this view of human life,
where the hero is conducted through a variety of detached scenes, in
which various agents appear and disappear, without, perhaps, having
any permanent influence on the progress of the story. Such is the
structure of Gil Blas, Roderick Random, and the lives and adventures
of many other heroes, who are described as running through different
stations of life, and encountering various adventures, which are only
connected with each other by having happened to be witnessed by the
same individual, whose identity unites them together, as the string of
a necklace links the beads, which are otherwise detached.

But though such an unconnected course of adventures is what most
frequently occurs in nature, yet the province of the romance writer
being artificial, there is more required from him than a mere
compliance with the simplicity of reality,--just as we demand from the
scientific gardener, that he shall arrange, in curious knots and
artificial parterres, the flowers which "nature boon" distributes
freely on hill and dale. Fielding, accordingly, in most of his novels,
but especially in Tom Jones, his _chef-d'oeuvre_, has set the
distinguished example of a story regularly built and consistent in all
its parts, in which nothing occurs, and scarce a personage is
introduced, that has not some share in tending to advance the
catastrophe.

To demand equal correctness and felicity in those who may follow in
the track of that illustrious novelist, would be to fetter too much
the power of giving pleasure, by surrounding it with penal rules;
since of this sort of light literature it may be especially
said--_tout genre est permis, hors le genre ennuyeux_. Still,
however, the more closely and happily the story is combined, and the
more natural and felicitous the catastrophe, the nearer such a
composition will approach the perfection of the novelist's art; nor
can an author neglect this branch of his profession, without incurring
proportional censure.

For such censure the Monastery gave but too much occasion. The
intrigue of the Romance, neither very interesting in itself, nor very
happily detailed, is at length finally disentangled by the breaking
out of national hostilities between England and Scotland, and the as
sudden renewal of the truce. Instances of this kind, it is true,
cannot in reality have been uncommon, but the resorting to such, in
order to accomplish the catastrophe, as by a _tour de force_, was
objected to as inartificial, and not perfectly, intelligible to the
general reader.

Still the Monastery, though exposed to severe and just criticism, did
not fail, judging from the extent of its circulation, to have some
interest for the public. And this, too, was according to the ordinary
course of such matters; for it very seldom happens that literary
reputation is gained by a single effort, and still more rarely is it
lost by a solitary miscarriage.

The author, therefore, had his days of grace allowed him, and time, if
he pleased, to comfort himself with the burden of the old Scots song,

  "If it isna weel bobbit.
  We'll bob it again."

ABBOTSFORD,
_1st November_, 1830.


       *       *       *       *       *


INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE

FROM CAPTAIN CLUTTERBUCK, LATE OF HIS MAJESTY'S ---- REGIMENT OF
INFANTRY, TO THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.

Sir,

Although I do not pretend to the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance, like many whom I believe to be equally strangers to you,
I am nevertheless interested in your publications, and desire their
continuance;-not that I pretend to much taste in fictitious
composition, or that I am apt to be interested in your grave scenes,
or amused by those which are meant to be lively. I will not disguise
from you, that I have yawned over the last interview of MacIvor and
his sister, and fell fairly asleep while the schoolmaster was reading
the humours of Dandie Dinmont. You see, sir, that I scorn to solicit
your favour in a way to which you are no stranger. If the papers I
enclose you are worth nothing, I will not endeavour to recommend them
by personal flattery, as a bad cook pours rancid butter upon stale
fish. No, sir! what I respect in you is the light you have
occasionally thrown on national antiquities, a study which I have
commenced rather late in life, but to which I am attached with the
devotions of a first love, because it is the only study I ever cared a
farthing for.

You shall have my history, sir, (it will not reach to three volumes,)
before that of my manuscript; and as you usually throw out a few lines
of verse (by way of skirmishers, I suppose) at the head of each
division of prose, I have had the luck to light upon a stanza in the
schoolmaster's copy of Burns which describes me exactly. I love it the
better, because it was originally designed for Captain Grose, an
excellent antiquary, though, like yourself, somewhat too apt to treat
with levity his own pursuits:

  'Tis said he was a soldier bred,
  And ane wad rather fa'en than fled;
  But now he's quit the spurtle blade,
                   And dog-skin wallet,
  And ta'en the--antiquarian trade,
                I think, they call it.

I never could conceive what influenced me, when a boy, in the choice
of a profession. Military zeal and ardour it was not, which made me
stand out for a commission in the Scots Fusiliers, when my tutors
and curators wished to bind me apprentice to old David Stiles, Clerk
to his Majesty's Signet. I say, military zeal it was _not_; for
I was no fighting boy in my own person, and cared not a penny to
read the history of the heroes who turned the world upside down in
former ages. As for courage, I had, as I have since discovered, just
as much of it as serve'd my turn, and not one frain of surplus. I
soon found out, indeed, that in action there was more anger in
running away than in standing fast; and besides, I could not afford
to lose my commission, which was my chief means of support. But, as
for that overboiling valour, which I have heard many of _ours_
talk of, though I seldom observed that it influenced them in the
actual affair---that exuberant zeal, which courts Danger as a
bride,--truly my courage was of a complexion much less ecstatical.

Again, the love of a red coat, which, in default of all other
aptitudes to the profession, has made many a bad soldier and some good
ones, was an utter stranger to my disposition. I cared not a  "bodle"
for the company of the misses: Nay, though there was a boarding-school
in the village, and though we used to meet with its fair inmates at
Simon Lightfoot's weekly Practising, I cannot recollect any strong
emotions being excited on these occasions, excepting the infinite
regret with which I went through the polite ceremonial of presenting
my partner with an orange, thrust into my pocket by my aunt for this
special purpose, but which, had I dared, I certainly would have
secreted for my own personal use. As for vanity, or love of finery for
itself, I was such a stranger to it, that the difficulty was great to
make me brush my coat, and appear in proper trim upon parade. I shall
never forget the rebuke of my old Colonel on a morning when the King
reviewed a brigade of which ours made part. "I am no friend to
extravagance, Ensign Clutterbuck," said he; "but, on the day when we
are to pass before the Sovereign of the kingdom, in the name of God I
would have at least shown him an inch of clean linen."

Thus, a stranger to the ordinary motives which lead young men to make
the army their choice, and without the least desire to become either a
hero or a dandy, I really do not know what determined my thoughts that
way, unless it were the happy state of half-pay indolence enjoyed by
Captain Doolittle, who had set up his staff of rest in my native
village. Every other person had, or seemed to have, something to do,
less or more. They did not, indeed, precisely go to school and learn
tasks, that last of evils in my estimation; but it did not escape my
boyish observation, that they were all bothered with something or
other like duty or labour--all but the happy Captain Doolittle. The
minister had his parish to visit, and his preaching to prepare, though
perhaps he made more fuss than he needed about both.  The laird had
his farming and improving operations to superintend; and, besides, he
had to attend trustee meetings, and lieutenancy meetings, and
head-courts, and meetings of justices, and what not--was as early up,
(that I detested,) and as much in the open air, wet and dry, as his
own grieve.  The shopkeeper (the village boasted but one of eminence)
stood indeed pretty much at his ease behind his counter, for his
custom was by no means overburdensome; but still he enjoyed his
_status_, as the Bailie calls it, upon condition of tumbling all
the wares in his booth over and over, when any one chose to want a
yard of muslin, a mousetrap, an ounce of caraways, a paper of pins,
the Sermons of Mr. Peden, or the Life of Jack the Giant-Queller, (not
Killer, as usually erroneously written and pronounced.--See my essay
on the true history of this worthy, where real facts have in a
peculiar degree been obscured by fable.) In short, all in the village
were under the necessity of doing something which they would rather
have left undone, excepting Captain Doolittle, who walked every
morning in the open street, which formed the high mall of our village,
in a blue coat with a red neck, and played at whist the whole evening,
when he could make up a party.  This happy vacuity of all employment
appeared to me so delicious, that it became the primary hint, which,
according to the system of Helvetius, as the minister says, determined
my infant talents towards the profession I was destined to illustrate.

But who, alas! can form a just estimate of their future prospects in
this deceitful world? I was not long engaged in my new profession,
before I discovered, that if the independent indolence of half-pay was
a paradise, the officer must pass through the purgatory of duty and
service in order to gain admission to it. Captain Doolittle might
brush his blue coat with the red neck, or leave it unbrushed, at his
pleasure; but Ensign Clutterbuck had no such option. Captain Doolittle
might go to bed at ten o'clock, if he had a mind; but the Ensign must
make the rounds in his turn. What was worse, the Captain might repose
under the tester of his tent-bed until noon, if he was so pleased; but
the Ensign, God help him, had to appear upon parade at peep of day. As
for duty, I made that as easy as I could, had the sergeant to whisper
to me the words of command, and bustled through as other folks did. Of
service, I saw enough for an indolent man--was buffeted up and down
the world, and visited both the East and West Indies, Egypt, and other
distant places, which my youth had scarce dreamed of.  The French I
saw, and felt too; witness two fingers on my right hand, which one of
their cursed hussars took off with his sabre as neatly as an hospital
surgeon. At length, the death of an old aunt, who left me some fifteen
hundred pounds, snugly vested in the three per cents, gave me the
long-wished-for opportunity of retiring, with the prospect of enjoying
a clean shirt and a guinea four times a-week at least.

For the purpose of commencing my new way of life, I selected for my
residence the village of Kennaquhair, in the south of Scotland,
celebrated for the ruins of its magnificent Monastery, intending there
to lead my future life in the _otium cum dignitate_ of half-pay
and annuity. I was not long, however, in making the grand discovery,
that in order to enjoy leisure, it is absolutely necessary it should
be preceded by occupation. For some time, it was delightful to wake at
daybreak, dreaming of the reveill?--then to recollect my happy
emancipation from the slavery that doomed me to start at a piece of
clattering parchment, turn on my other side, damn the parade, and go
to sleep again. But even this enjoyment had its termination; and time,
when it became a stock entirely at my own disposal, began to hang
heavy on my hand.

I angled for two days, during which time I lost twenty hooks, and
several scores of yards of gut and line, and caught not even a minnow.
Hunting was out of the question, for the stomach of a horse by no
means agrees with the half-pay establishment. When I shot, the
shepherds, and ploughmen, and my very dog, quizzed me every time that
I missed, which was, generally speaking, every time I fired. Besides,
the country gentlemen in this quarter like their game, and began to
talk of prosecutions and interdicts.  I did not give up fighting the
French to commence a domestic war with the "pleasant men of
Teviotdale," as the song calls them; so I e'en spent three days (very
agreeably) in cleaning my gun, and disposing it upon two hooks over my
chimney-piece.

The success of this accidental experiment set me on trying my skill in
the mechanical arts. Accordingly I took down and cleaned my landlady's
cuckoo-clock, and in so doing, silenced that companion of the spring
for ever and a day. I mounted a turning-lathe, and in attempting to
use it, I very nearly cribbed off, with an inch-and-half former, one
of the fingers which the hussar had left me.

Books I tried, both those of the little circulating library, and of
the more rational subscription collection maintained by this
intellectual people. But neither the light reading of the one, nor the
heavy artillery of the other, suited my purpose. I always fell asleep
at the fourth or fifth page of history or disquisition; and it took me
a month's hard reading to wade through a half-bound trashy novel,
during which I was pestered with applications to return the volumes,
by every half-bred milliner's miss about the place.  In short, during
the time when all the town besides had something to do, I had nothing
for it, but to walk in the church-yard, and whistle till it was
dinner-time.

During these promenades, the ruins necessarily forced themselves on my
attention, and, by degrees, I found myself engaged in studying the
more minute ornaments, and at length the general plan, of this noble
structure.  The old sexton aided my labours, and gave me his portion
of traditional lore. Every day added something to my stock of
knowledge respecting the ancient state of the building; and at length
I made discoveries concerning the purpose of several detached and very
ruinous portions of it, the use of which had hitherto been either
unknown altogether or erroneously explained.

The knowledge which I thus acquired I had frequent opportunities of
retailing to those visiters whom the progress of a Scottish tour
brought to visit this celebrated spot. Without encroaching on the
privilege of my friend the sexton, I became gradually an assistant
Cicerone in the task of description and explanation, and often (seeing
a fresh party of visiters arrive) has he turned over to me those to
whom he had told half his story, with the flattering observation,
"What needs I say ony mair about it?  There's the Captain kens mair
anent it than I do, or any man in the town." Then would I salute the
strangers courteously, and expatiate to their astonished minds upon
crypts and chancels, and naves, arches, Gothic and Saxon architraves,
mullions and flying buttresses. It not unfrequently happened, that an
acquaintance which commenced in the Abbey concluded in the inn, which
served to relieve the solitude as well as the monotony of my
landlady's shoulder of mutton, whether roast, cold, or hashed.

By degrees my mind became enlarged; I found a book or two which
enlightened me on the subject of Gothic architecture, and I read now
with pleasure, because I was interested in what I read about. Even my
character began to dilate and expand. I spoke with more authority at
the club, and was listened to with deference, because on one subject,
at least, I possessed more information than any of its members.
Indeed, I found that even my stories about Egypt, which, to say truth,
were somewhat threadbare, were now listened to with more respect than
formerly. "The Captain," they said, "had something in him after
a',--there were few folk kend sae muckle about the Abbey."

With this general approbation waxed my own sense of self-importance,
and my feeling of general comfort. I ate with more appetite, I
digested with more ease, I lay down at night with joy, and slept sound
till morning, when I arose with a sense of busy importance, and hied
me to measure, to examine, and to compare the various parts of this
interesting structure. I lost all sense and consciousness of certain
unpleasant sensations of a nondescript nature, about my head and
stomach, to which I had been in the habit of attending, more for the
benefit of the village apothecary than my own, for the pure want of
something else to think about. I had found out an occupation
unwittingly, and was happy because I had something to do.  In a word,
I had commenced local antiquary, and was not unworthy of the name.

Whilst I was in this pleasing career of busy idleness, for so it might
at best be called, it happened that I was one night sitting in my
little parlour, adjacent to the closet which my landlady calls my
bedroom, in the act of preparing for an early retreat to the realms of
Morpheus. Dugdale's Monasticon, borrowed from the library at A------,
was lying on the table before me, flanked by some excellent Cheshire
cheese, (a present, by the way, from an honest London citizen, to whom
I had explained the difference between a Gothic and a Saxon arch,) and
a glass of Vanderhagen's best ale. Thus armed at all points against my
old enemy Time, I was leisurely and deliciously preparing for bed--now
reading a line of old Dugdale--now sipping my ale, or munching my
bread and cheese--now undoing the strings at my breeches' knees, or a
button or two of my waistcoat, until the village clock should strike
ten, before which time I make it a rule never to go to bed.  A loud
knocking, however, interrupted my ordinary process on this occasion,
and the voice of my honest landlord of the George was heard
vociferating, [Footnote: The George was, and is, the principal inn in
the village of Kennaquhair, or Melrose. But the landlord of the period
was not the same civil and quiet person by whom the inn is now kept.
David Kyle, a Melrose proprietor of no little importance, a first-rate
person of consequence in whatever belonged to the business of the
town, was the original owner and landlord of the inn. Poor David, like
many other busy men, took so much care of public affairs, as in some
degree to neglect his own. There are persons still alive at
Kennaquhair who can recognise him and his peculiarities in the
following sketch of mine Host of the George.] "What the deevil, Mrs.
Grimslees, the Captain is no in his bed?  and a gentleman at our house
has ordered a fowl and minced collops, and a bottle of sherry, and has
sent to ask him to supper, to tell him all about the Abbey."

"Na," answered Luckie Grimslees, in the true sleepy tone of a Scottish
matron when ten o'clock is going to strike, "he's no in his bed, but
I'se warrant him no gae out at this time o' night to keep folks
sitting up waiting for him--the Captain's a decent man."

I plainly perceived this last compliment was made for my hearing, by
way both of indicating and of recommending the course of conduct which
Mrs. Grimslees desired I should pursue. But I had not been knocked
about the world for thirty years and odd, and lived a bluff bachelor
all the while, to come home and be put under petticoat government by
my landlady.  Accordingly I opened my chamber-door, and desired my old
friend David to walk up stairs.

"Captain," said he, as he entered, "I am as glad to find you up as if
I had hooked a twenty pound saumon. There's a gentleman up yonder that
will not sleep sound in his bed this blessed night unless he has the
pleasure to drink a glass of wine with you."

"You know, David," I replied, with becoming dignity, "that I cannot
with propriety go out to visit strangers at this time of night, or
accept of invitations from people of whom I know nothing."

David swore a round oath, and added, "Was ever the like heard of? He
has ordered a fowl and egg sauce, a pancake and minced collops and a
bottle of sherry--D'ye think I wad come and ask you to go to keep
company with ony bit English rider that sups on toasted cheese, and a
cheerer of rum-toddy? This is a gentleman every inch of him, and a
virtuoso, a clean virtuoso-a sad-coloured stand of claithes, and a wig
like the curled back of a mug-ewe. The very first question he speered
was about the auld drawbrig that has been at the bottom of the water
these twal score years--I have seen the fundations when we were
sticking saumon--And how the deevil suld he ken ony thing about the
old drawbrig, unless he were a virtuoso?" [Footnote: There is more to
be said about this old bridge hereafter. See Note, p. 57.]

David being a virtuoso in his own way, and moreover a landholder and
heritor, was a qualified judge of all who frequented his house, and
therefore I could not avoid again tying the strings of my knees.

"That's right, Captain," vociferated David; "you twa will be as thick
as three in a bed an ance ye forgather. I haena seen the like o' him
my very sell since I saw the great Doctor Samuel Johnson on his tower
through Scotland, whilk tower is lying in my back parlour for the
amusement of my guests, wi' the twa boards torn aff."

"Then the gentleman is a scholar, David?"

"I'se uphaud him a scholar," answered David: "he has a black coat on,
or a brown ane, at ony-rate."

"Is he a clergyman?"

"I am thinking no, for he looked after his horse's supper before he
spoke o' his ain," replied mine host.

"Has he a servant?" demanded I.

"Nae servant," answered David; "but a grand face o' his ain, that wad
gar ony body be willing to serve him that looks upon him."

"And what makes him think of disturbing me? Ah, David, this has
been some of your chattering; you are perpetually bringing your guests
on my shoulders, as if it were my business to entertain every man who
comes to the George."

"What the deil wad ye hae me do, Captain?" answered mine host; "a
gentleman lights down, and asks me in a most earnest manner, what man
of sense and learning there is about our town, that can tell him about
the antiquities of the place, and specially about the auld Abbey--ye
wadna hae me tell the gentleman a lee? and ye ken weel eneugh there is
naebody in the town can say a reasonable word about it, be it no
yoursell, except the bedral, and he is as fou as a piper by this time.
So, says I, there's Captain Clutterbuck, that's a very civil gentleman
and has little to do forby telling a' the auld cracks about the Abbey,
and dwells just hard by. Then says the gentleman to me, 'Sir,' says
he, very civilly, 'have the goodness to step to Captain Clutterbuck
with my compliments, and say I am a stranger, who have been led to
these parts chiefly by the fame of these Ruins, and that I would call
upon him, but the hour is late.' And mair he said that I have
forgotten, but I weel remember it ended,--'And, landlord, get a bottle
of your best sherry, and supper for two.'--Ye wadna have had me refuse
to do the gentleman's bidding, and me a publican?"

"Well, David," said I, "I wish your virtuoso had taken a fitter hour--
but as you say he is a gentleman--"

"I'se uphaud him that--the order speaks for itsell--a bottle of sherry
--minched collops and a fowl--that's speaking like a gentleman, I
trow?--That's right, Captain, button weel up, the night's raw--but
the water's clearing for a' that; we'll be on't neist night wi' my
Lord's boats, and we'll hae ill luck if I dinna send you a kipper to
relish your ale at e'en." [Footnote:  The nobleman whose boats are
mentioned in the text, is the late kind and amiable Lord Sommerville,
an intimate friend of the author.  David Kyle was a constant and
privileged attendant when Lord Sommerville had a party for spearing
salmon; on such occasions, eighty or a hundred fish were often killed
between Gleamer and Leaderfoot.]

In five minutes after this dialogue, I found myself in the parlour of
the George, and in the presence of the stranger.

He was a grave personage, about my own age, (which we shall call about
fifty,) and really had, as my friend David expressed it, something in
his face that inclined men to oblige and to serve him. Yet this
expression of authority was not at all of the cast which I have seen
in the countenance of a general of brigade, neither was the stranger's
dress at all martial. It consisted of a uniform suit of iron-gray
clothes, cut in rather an old-fashioned form. His legs were defended
with strong leathern gambadoes, which, according to an antiquarian
contrivance, opened at the sides, and were secured by steel clasps.
His countenance was worn as much by toil and sorrow as by age, for it
intimated that he had seen and endured much. His address was
singularly pleasing and gentlemanlike, and the apology which he made
for disturbing me at such an hour, and in such a manner, was so well
and handsomely expressed, that I could not reply otherwise than by
declaring my willingness to be of service to him.

"I have been a traveller to-day, sir," said he, "and I would willingly
defer the little I have to say till after supper, for which I feel
rather more appetized than usual."

We sate down to table, and notwithstanding the stranger's alleged
appetite, as well as the gentle preparation of cheese and ale which I
had already laid aboard, I really believe that I of the two did the
greater honour to my friend David's fowl and minced collops.

When the cloth was removed, and we had each made a tumbler of negus,
of that liquor which hosts call Sherry, and guests call Lisbon, I
perceived that the stranger seemed pensive, silent, and somewhat
embarrassed, as if he had something to communicate which he knew not
well how to introduce.  To pave the way for him, I spoke of the
ancient ruins of the Monastery, and of their history. But, to my great
surprise, I found I had met my match with a witness. The stranger not
only knew all that I could tell him, but a great deal more; and,  what
was still more mortifying, he was able, by reference to dates,
charters, and other evidence of facts, that, as Burns says, "downa be
disputed," to correct many of the vague tales which I had adopted on
loose and vulgar tradition, as well as to confute more than one of my
favourite theories on the subject of the old monks and their
dwellings, which I had sported freely in all the presumption of
superior information. And here I cannot but remark, that much of the
stranger's arguments and inductions rested upon the authority of Mr.
Deputy Register of Scotland, [Footnote:  Thomas Thomson, Esq., whose
well-deserved panegyric ought to be found on another page than one
written by an intimate friend of thirty years' standing.] and his
lucubrations; a gentleman whose indefatigable research into the
national records is like to destroy my trade, and that of all local
antiquaries, by substituting truth instead of legend and romance.
Alas! I would the learned gentleman did but know how difficult it is
for us dealers in petty wares of antiquity to--

  Pluck from our memories a rooted "legend,"
  Raze out the written records of our brain.
  Or cleanse our bosoms of that perilous stuff--

and so forth. It would, I am sure, move his pity to think how many old
dogs he hath set to learn new tricks, how many venerable parrots he
hath taught to sing a new song, how many gray heads he hath addled by
vain attempts to exchange their old _Mumpsimus_ for his new
_Sumpsimus_. But let it pass. _Humana perpessi sumus_--All
changes round us, past, present, and to come; that which was history
yesterday becomes fable to-day, and the truth of to-day is hatched
into a lie by to-morrow.

Finding myself like to be overpowered in the Monastery, which I had
hitherto regarded as my citadel, I began, like a skilful general, to
evacuate that place of defence, and fight my way through the adjacent
country. I had recourse to my acquaintance with the families and
antiquities of the neighbourhood, ground on which I thought I might
skirmish at large without its being possible for the stranger to meet
me with advantage. But I was mistaken.

The man in the iron-gray suit showed a much more minute knowledge of
these particulars than I had the least pretension to. He could tell
the very year in which the family of De Haga first settled on their
ancient barony.

[Footnote: The family of De Haga, modernized into Haig, of Bemerside,
is of the highest antiquity, and is the subject of one of the
prophecies of Thomas the Rhymer:--

  Betide, betide, whate'er betide.
  Haig shall be Haig of Bemerside. ]

Not a Thane within reach but he knew his family and connexions, how
many of his ancestors had fallen by the sword of the English, how many
in domestic brawl, and how many by the hand of the executioner for
march-treason. Their castles he was acquainted with from turret to
foundation-stone; and as for the miscellaneous antiquities scattered
about the country, he knew every one of them, from a _cromlech_
to a _cairn_, and could give as good an account of each as if he
had lived in the time of the Danes or Druids.

I was now in the mortifying predicament of one who suddenly finds
himself a scholar when he came to teach, and nothing was left for me
but to pick up as much of his conversation as I could, for the benefit
of the next company. I told, indeed, Allan Ramsay's story of the Monk
and Miller's Wife, in order to retreat with some honour under cover of
a parting volley.  Here, however, my flank was again turned by the
eternal stranger.

"You are pleased to be facetious, sir," said he; "but you cannot be
ignorant that the ludicrous incident you mentioned is the subject of a
tale much older than that of Allan Ramsay."

I nodded, unwilling to acknowledge my ignorance, though, in fact, I
knew no more what he meant than did one of my friend David's
post-horses.

"I do not allude," continued my omniscient companion, "to the curious
poem published by Pinkerton from the Maitland Manuscript, called the
Fryars of Berwick, although it presents a very minute and amusing
picture of Scottish manners during the reign of James V.; but rather
to the Italian novelist, by whom, so far as I know, the story was
first printed, although unquestionably he first took his original from
some ancient _fabliau_." [Footnote: It is curious to remark at how
little expense of invention successive ages are content to receive
amusement. The same story which Ramsay and Dunbar have successively
handled, forms also the subject of the modern farce, No Song, no
Supper.]

"It is not to be doubted," answered I, not very well understanding,
however, the proposition to which I gave such unqualified assent.

"Yet," continued my companion, "I question much, had you known my
situation and profession, whether you would have pitched upon this
precise anecdote for my amusement."

This observation he made in a tone of perfect good-humour. I pricked
up my ears at the hint, and answered as politely as I could, that my
ignorance of his condition and rank could be the only cause of my
having stumbled on anything disagreeable; and that I was most willing
to apologize for my unintentional offence, so soon as I should know
wherein it consisted.

"Nay, no offence, sir," he replied; "offence can only exist where it
is taken. I have been too long accustomed to more severe and cruel
misconstructions, to be offended at a popular jest, though directed at
my profession."

"Am I to understand, then," I answered, "that I am speaking with a
Catholic clergyman?"

"An unworthy monk of the order of Saint Benedict," said the stranger,
"belonging to a community of your own countrymen, long established in
France, and scattered unhappily by the events of the Revolution."
"Then," said I, "you are a native Scotchman, and from this
neighbourhood?"

"Not so," answered the monk; "I am a Scotchman by extraction only,
and never was in this neighbourhood during my whole life."

"Never in this neighbourhood, and yet so minutely acquainted with its
history, its traditions, and even its external scenery! You surprise
me, sir," I replied.

"It is not surprising," he said, "that I should have that sort of
local information, when it is considered, that my uncle, an excellent
man, as well as a good Scotchman, the head also of our religious
community, employed much of his leisure in making me acquainted with
these particulars; and that I myself, disgusted with what has been
passing around me, have for many years amused myself, by digesting and
arranging the various scraps of information which I derived from my
worthy relative, and other aged brethren of our order."

"I presume, sir," said I, "though I would by no means intrude the
question, that you are now returned to Scotland with a view to settle
amongst your countrymen, since the great political catastrophe of our
time has reduced your corps?"

"No, sir," replied the Benedictine, "such is not my intention. A
European potentate, who still cherishes the Catholic faith, has
offered us a retreat within his dominions, where a few of my scattered
brethren are already assembled, to pray to God for blessings on their
protector, and pardon to their enemies. No one, I believe, will be
able to object to us under our new establishment, that the extent of
our revenues will be inconsistent with our vows of poverty and
abstinence; but, let us strive to be thankful to God, that the snare
of temporal abundance is removed from us."

"Many of your convents abroad, sir," said I, "enjoyed very handsome
incomes--and yet, allowing for times, I question if any were better
provided for than the Monastery of this village. It is said to have
possessed nearly two thousand pounds in yearly money-rent, fourteen
chalders and nine bolls of wheat, fifty-six chalders five bolls
barley, forty-four chalders and ten bolls oats, capons and poultry,
butter, salt, carriage and arriage, peats and kain, wool and ale."

"Even too much of all these temporal goods, sir," said my companion,
"which, though well intended by the pious donors, served only to make
the establishment the envy and the prey of those by whom it was finally
devoured."

"In the meanwhile, however," I observed, "the monks had an easy life
of it, and, as the old song goes,

  --made gude kale
  On Fridays when they fasted."

"I understand you, sir," said the Benedictine; "it is difficult, saith
the proverb, to carry a full cup without spilling. Unquestionably the
wealth of the community, as it endangered the safety of the
establishment by exciting the cupidity of others, was also in frequent
instances a snare to the brethren themselves. And yet we have seen the
revenues of convents expended, not only in acts of beneficence and
hospitality to individuals, but in works of general and permanent
advantage to the world at large.  The noble folio collection of French
historians, commenced in 1737, under the inspection and at the expense
of the community of Saint Maur, will long show that the revenues of
the Benedictines were not always spent in self-indulgence, and that
the members of that order did not uniformly slumber in sloth and
indolence, when they had discharged the formal duties of their rule."

As I knew nothing earthly at the time about the community of St. Maur,
and their learned labours, I could only return a mumbling assent to
this proposition. I have since seen this noble work in the library of
a distinguished family, and I must own I am ashamed to reflect, that,
in so wealthy a country as ours, a similar digest of our historians
should not be undertaken, under the patronage of the noble and the
learned, in rivalry of that which the Benedictines of Paris executed
at the expense of their own conventual funds.

"I perceive," said the ex-Benedictine, smiling, "that your heretical
prejudices are too strong to allow us poor brethren any merit, whether
literary or spiritual."

"Far from it, sir," said I; "I assure you I have been much obliged to
monks in my time. When I was quartered in a Monastery in Flanders, in
the campaign of 1793, I never lived more comfortably in my life. They
were jolly fellows, the Flemish Canons, and right sorry was I to leave
my good quarters, and to know that my honest hosts were to be at the
mercy of the Sans-Culottes. But _fortune de la guerre!_"

The poor Benedictine looked down and was silent. I had unwittingly
awakened a train of bitter reflections, or rather I had touched
somewhat rudely upon a chord which seldom ceased to vibrate of itself.
But he was too much accustomed to this sorrowful train of ideas to
suffer it to overcome him. On my part, I hastened to atone for my
blunder. "If there was any object of his journey to this country in
which I could, with propriety, assist him, I begged to offer him my
best services." I own I laid some little emphasis on the words "with
propriety," as I felt it would ill become me, a sound Protestant, and
a servant of government so far as my half-pay was concerned, to
implicate myself in any recruiting which my companion might have
undertaken in behalf of foreign seminaries, or in any similar design
for the advancement of Popery, which, whether the Pope be actually the
old lady of Babylon or no, it did not become me in any manner to
advance or countenance.

My new friend hastened to relieve my indecision. "I was about to
request your assistance, sir," he said, "in a matter which cannot but
interest you as an antiquary, and a person of research. But I assure
you it relates entirely to events and persons removed to the distance
of two centuries and a half. I have experienced too much evil from the
violent unsettlement of the country in which I was born, to be a rash
labourer in the work of innovation in that of my ancestors."

I again assured him of my willingness to assist him in anything that
was not contrary to my allegiance or religion.

"My proposal," he replied, "affects neither.--May God bless the
reigning family in Britain! They are not, indeed, of that dynasty to
restore which my ancestors struggled and suffered in vain; but the
Providence who has conducted his present Majesty to the throne, has
given him the virtues necessary to his time--firmness and
intrepidity--a true love of his country, and an enlightened view of
the dangers by which she is surrounded.--For the religion of these
realms, I am contented to hope that the great Power, whose mysterious
dispensation has rent them from the bosom of the church, will, in his
own good time and manner, restore them to its holy pale. The efforts
of an individual, obscure and humble as myself, might well retard, but
could never advance, a work so mighty."

"May I then inquire, sir," said I, "with what purpose you seek this
country?"

Ere my companion replied, he took from his pocket a clasped paper
book, about the size of a regimental orderly-book, full, as it seemed,
of memoranda; and, drawing one of the candles close to him, (for
David, as a strong proof of his respect for the stranger, had indulged
us with two,) he seemed to peruse the contents very earnestly.

"There is among the ruins of the western end of the Abbey church,"
said he, looking up to me, yet keeping the memorandum-book half open,
and occasionally glancing at it, as if to refresh his memory, "a sort
of recess or chapel beneath a broken arch, and in the immediate
vicinity of one of those shattered Gothic columns which once supported
the magnificent roof, whose fall has now encumbered that part of the
building with its ruins."

"I think," said I, "that I know whereabouts you are. Is there not in
the side wall of the chapel, or recess, which you mention, a large
carved stone, bearing a coat of arms, which no one hitherto has been
able to decipher?"

"You are right," answered the Benedictine; and again consulting his
memoranda, he added, "the arms on the dexter side are those of
Glendinning, being a cross parted by a cross indented and
countercharged of the same; and on the sinister three spur-rowels for
those of Avenel; they are two ancient families, now almost extinct in
this country--the arms _part y per pale_."

"I think," said I, "there is no part of this ancient structure with
which you are not as well acquainted as was the mason who built it.
But if your information be correct, he who made out these bearings
must have had better eyes than mine."

"His eyes," said the Benedictine, "have long been closed in death;
probably when he inspected the monument it was in a more perfect
state, or he may have derived his information from the tradition of
the place."

"I assure you," said I, "that no such tradition now exists. I have
made several reconnoissances among the old people, in hopes to learn
something of the armorial bearings, but I never heard of such a
circumstance. It seems odd that you should have acquired it in a
foreign land."

"These trifling particulars," he replied, "were formerly looked upon
as more important, and they were sanctified to the exiles who retained
recollection of them, because they related to a place dear indeed to
memory, but which their eyes could never again behold. It is possible,
in like manner, that on the Potomac or Susquehannah, you may find
traditions current concerning places in England, which are utterly
forgotten in the neighbourhood where they originated. But to my
purpose. In this recess, marked by the armorial bearings, lies buried
a treasure, and it is in order to remove it that I have undertaken my
present journey."

"A treasure!" echoed I, in astonishment.

"Yes," replied the monk, "an inestimable treasure, for those who know
how to use it rightly."

I own my ears did tingle a little at the word treasure, and that a
handsome tilbury, with a neat groom in blue and scarlet livery, having
a smart cockade on his glazed hat, seemed as it were to glide across
the room before gay eyes, while a voice, as of a crier, pronounced my
ear, "Captain Clutterbuck's tilbury--drive up." But I resisted the
devil, and he fled from me.

"I believe," said I, "all hidden treasure belongs either to the king
or the lord of the soil; and as I have served his majesty, I cannot
concern myself in any adventure which may have an end in the Court of
Exchequer."

"The treasure I seek," said the stranger, smiling, "will not be envied
by princes or nobles,---it is simply the heart of an upright man."

"Ah! I understand you," I answered; "some relic, forgotten in the
confusion of the Reformation. I know the value which men of your
persuasion put upon the bodies and limbs of saints. I have seen the
Three Kings of Cologne."

"The relics which I seek, however," said the Benedictine, "are not
precisely of that nature. The excellent relative whom I have already
mentioned, amused his leisure hours with putting into form the
traditions of his family, particularly some remarkable circumstances
which took place about the first breaking out of the schism of the
church in Scotland. He became so much interested in his own labours,
that at length he resolved that the heart of one individual, the hero
of his tale, should rest no longer in a land of heresy, now deserted
by all his kindred. As he knew where it was deposited, he formed the
resolution to visit his native country for the purpose of recovering
this valued relic. But age, and at length disease, interfered with his
resolution, and it was on his deathbed that he charged me to undertake
the task in his stead. The various important events which have crowded
upon each other, our ruin and our exile, have for many years obliged
me to postpone this delegated duty. Why, indeed, transfer the relics
of a holy and worthy man to a country, where religion and virtue are
become the mockery of the scorner? I have now a home, which I trust
may be permanent, if any thing in this earth can be, termed so.
Thither will I transport the heart of the good father, and beside the
shrine which it shall occupy, I will construct my own grave."

"He must, indeed, have been an excellent man," replied I, "whose
memory, at so distant a period, calls forth such strong marks of
regard."

"He was, as you justly term him," said the ecclesiastic, "indeed
excellent--excellent in his life and doctrine--excellent, above all,
in his self-denied and disinterested sacrifice of all that life holds
dear to principle and to friendship. But you shall read his history. I
shall be happy at once to gratify your curiosity, and to show my sense
of your kindness, if you will have the goodness to procure me the
means of accomplishing my object." I replied to the Benedictine, that,
as the rubbish amongst which he proposed to search was no part of the
ordinary burial-ground, and as I was on the best terms with the
sexton, I had little doubt that I could procure him the means of
executing his pious purpose.

With this promise we parted for the night; and on the ensuing morning
I made it my business to see the sexton, who, for a small gratuity,
readily granted permission of search, on condition, however, that he
should be present himself, to see that the stranger removed nothing of
intrinsic value.

"To banes, and skulls, and hearts, if he can find ony, he shall be
welcome," said this guardian of the ruined Monastery, "there's plenty
a' about, an he's curious of them; but if there be ony picts" (meaning
perhaps _pyx_) "or chalishes, or the like of such Popish veshells
of gold and silver, deil hae me an I conneve at their being removed."

The sexton also stipulated, that our researches should take place at
night, being unwilling to excite observation, or give rise to scandal.
My new acquaintance and I spent the day as became lovers of hoar
antiquity. We visited every corner of these magnificent ruins again
and again during the forenoon; and, having made a comfortable dinner
at David's, we walked in the afternoon to such places in the
neighbourhood as ancient tradition or modern conjecture had rendered
mark worthy. Night found us in the interior of the ruins, attended by
the sexton, who carried a dark lantern, and stumbling alternately over
the graves of the dead, and the fragments of that architecture, which
they doubtless trusted would have canopied their bones till doomsday.

I am by no means particularly superstitious, and yet there was that in
the present service which I did not very much like. There was
something awful in the resolution of disturbing, at such an hour, and
in such a place, the still and mute sanctity of the grave. My
companions were free from this impression--the stranger from his
energetic desire to execute the purpose for which he came--and the
sexton from habitual indifference. We soon stood in the aisle, which,
by the account of the Benedictine, contained the bones of the family
of Glendinning, and were busily employed in removing the rubbish from
a corner which the stranger pointed out. If a half-pay Captain could
have represented an ancient Border-knight, or an ex-Benedictine of the
nineteenth century a wizard monk of the sixteenth, we might have aptly
enough personified the search after Michael Scott's lamp and book of
magic power. But the sexton would have been _de trop_ in the
group.  [Footnote: This is one of those passages which must now read
awkwardly, since every one knows that the Novelist and the author of
the Lay of the Minstrel, is the same person. But before the avowal was
made, the author was forced into this and similar offences against
good taste, to meet an argument, often repeated, that there was
something very mysterious in the Author of Waverley's reserve
concerning Sir Walter Scott, an author sufficiently voluminous at
least. I had a great mind to remove the passages from this edition,
but the more candid way is to explain how they came there.]

Ere the stranger, assisted by the sexton in his task, had been long at
work, they came to some hewn stones, which seemed to have made part of
a small shrine, though now displaced and destroyed.

"Let us remove these with caution, my friend," said the stranger,
"lest we injure that which I come to seek."

"They are prime stanes," said the sexton, "picked free every ane of
them;--warse than the best wad never serve the monks, I'se warrant."

A minute after he had made this observation, he exclaimed, "I hae fund
something now that stands again' the spade, as if it were neither
earth nor stane."

The stranger stooped eagerly to assist him.

"Na, na, haill o' my ain," said the sexton; "nae halves or
quarters;"--and he lifted from amongst the ruins a small leaden box.

"You will be disappointed, my friend," said the Benedictine, "if you
expect any thing there but the mouldering dust of a human heart, closed
in an inner case of porphyry."

I interposed as a neutral party, and taking the box from the sexton,
reminded him, that if there were treasure concealed in it, still it
could not become the property of the finder. I then proposed, that as
the place was too dark to examine the contents of the leaden casket,
we should adjourn to David's, where we might have the advantage of
light and fire while carrying on our investigation. The stranger
requested us to go before, assuring us that he would follow in a few
minutes.

I fancy that old Mattocks suspected these few minutes might be
employed in effecting farther discoveries amongst the tombs, for he
glided back through a side-aisle to watch the Benedictine's motions,
but presently returned, and told me in a whisper that "the gentleman
was on his knees amang the cauld stanes, praying like ony saunt."

I stole back, and beheld the old man actually employed as Mattocks had
informed me. The language seemed to be Latin; and as, the whispered,
yet solemn accent, glided away through the ruined aisles, I could not
help reflecting how long it was since they had heard the forms of that
religion, for the exercise of which they had been reared at such cost
of time, taste, labour, and expense. "Come away, come away," said I;
"let us leave him to himself, Mattocks; this is no business of ours."

"My certes, no, Captain," said Mattocks; "ne'ertheless, it winna be
amiss to keep an eye on him. My father, rest his saul, was a
horse-couper, and used to say he never was cheated in a naig in his
life, saving by a west-country whig frae Kilmarnock, that said a grace
ower a dram o' whisky. But this gentleman will be a Roman, I'se
warrant?"

"You are perfectly right in that, Saunders," said I.

"Ay, I have seen twa or three of their priests that were chased ower
here some score o' years syne. They just danced like mad when they
looked on the friars' heads, and the nuns' heads, in the cloister
yonder; they took to them like auld acquaintance like.--Od, he is not
stirring yet, mair than he were a through-stane! [Footnote: A
tombstone.] I never kend a Roman, to say kend him, but ane--mair by
token, he was the only ane in the town to ken--and that was auld Jock
of the Pend. It wad hae been lang ere ye fand Jock praying in the
Abbey in a thick night, wi' his knees on a cauld stane.  Jock likit a
kirk wi' a chimley in't. Mony a merry ploy I hae had wi' him down at
the inn yonder; and when he died, decently I wad hae earded him; but,
or I gat his grave weel howkit, some of the quality, that were o' his
ain unhappy persuasion, had the corpse whirried away up the water, and
buried him after their ain pleasure, doubtless--they kend best. I wad
hae made nae great charge. I wadna hae excised Johnnie, dead or
alive.--Stay, see--the strange gentleman is coming."

"Hold the lantern to assist him, Mattocks," said I.--"This is rough
walking, sir."

"Yes," replied the Benedictine; "I may say with a poet, who is
doubtless familiar to you----"

I should be surprised if he were, thought I internally.

The stranger continued:

  "Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
  Have my old feet stumbled at graves!"

"We are now clear of the churchyard," said I, "and have but a short
walk to David's, where I hope we shall find a cheerful fire to enliven
us after our night's work."

We entered, accordingly, the little parlour, into which Mattocks was
also about to push himself with sufficient effrontery, when David,
with a most astounding oath, expelled him by head and shoulders,
d--ning his curiosity, that would not let gentlemen be private in
their own inn. Apparently mine host considered his own presence as no
intrusion, for he crowded up to the table on which I had laid down the
leaden box. It was frail and wasted, as might be guessed, from having
lain so many years in the ground.  On opening it, we found deposited
within, a case made of porphyry, as the stranger had announced to us.

"I fancy," he said, "gentlemen, your curiosity will not be
satisfied,--perhaps I should say that your suspicions will not be
removed,--unless I undo this casket; yet it only contains the
mouldering remains of a heart, once the seat of the noblest thoughts."

He undid the box with great caution; but the shrivelled substance
which it contained bore now no resemblance to what it might once have
been, the means used having been apparently unequal to preserve its
shape and colour, although they were adequate to prevent its total
decay. We were quite satisfied, notwithstanding, that it was, what the
stranger asserted, the remains of a human heart; and David readily
promised his influence in the village, which was almost co-ordinate
with that of the bailie himself, to silence all idle rumours. He was,
moreover, pleased to favour us with his company to supper; and having
taken the lion's share of two bottles of sherry, he not only
sanctioned with his plenary authority the stranger's removal of the
heart, but, I believe, would have authorized the removal of the Abbey
itself, were it not that it happens considerably to advantage the
worthy publican's own custom.

The object of the Benedictine's visit to the land of his forefathers
being now accomplished, he announced his intention of leaving us early
in the ensuing day, but requested my company to breakfast with him
before his departure. I came accordingly, and when we had finished our
morning's meal, the priest took me apart, and pulling from his pocket
a large bundle of papers, he put them into my hands. "These," said he,
"Captain Clutterbuck, are genuine Memoirs of the sixteenth century,
and exhibit in a singular, and, as I think, an interesting point of
view, the manners of that period. I am induced to believe that their
publication will not be an unacceptable present to the British public;
and willingly make over to you any profit that may accrue from such a
transaction."

I stared a little at this annunciation, and observed, that the hand
seemed too modern for the date he assigned to the manuscript.

"Do not mistake me, sir," said the Benedictine; "I did not mean to say
the Memoirs were written in the sixteenth century, but only, that they
were compiled from authentic materials of that period, but written in
the taste and language of the present day. My uncle commenced this
book; and I, partly to improve my habit of English composition, partly
to divert melancholy thoughts, amused my leisure hours with continuing
and concluding it. You will see the period of the story where my uncle
leaves off his narrative, and I commence mine. In fact, they relate in
a great measure to different persons, as well as to a different
period."

Retaining the papers in my hand, I proceeded to state to him my
doubts, whether, as a good Protestant, I could undertake or
superintend a publication written probably in the spirit of Popery.

"You will find," he said, "no matter of controversy in these sheets,
nor any sentiments stated, with which, I trust, the good in all
persuasions will not be willing to join. I remembered I was writing
for a land unhappily divided from the Catholic faith; and I have taken
care to say nothing which, justly interpreted, could give ground for
accusing me of partiality. But if, upon collating my narrative with
the proofs to which I refer you--for you will find copies of many of
the original papers in that parcel--you are of opinion that I have
been partial to my own faith, I freely give you leave to correct my
errors in that respect. I own, however, I am not conscious of this
defect, and have rather to fear that the Catholics may be of opinion,
that I have mentioned circumstances respecting the decay of discipline
which preceded, and partly occasioned, the great schism, called by you
the Reformation, over which I ought to have drawn a veil. And indeed,
this is one reason why I choose the papers should appear in a foreign
land, and pass to the press through the hands of a stranger."

To this I had nothing to reply, unless to object my own incompetency
to the task the good father was desirous to impose upon me. On this
subject he was pleased to say more, I fear, than his knowledge of me
fully warranted--more, at any rate, than my modesty will permit me to
record. At length he ended, with advising me, if I continued to feel
the diffidence which I stated, to apply to some veteran of literature,
whose experience might supply my deficiencies. Upon these terms we
parted, with mutual expressions of regard, and I have never since
heard of him.

After several attempts to peruse the quires of paper thus singularly
conferred on me, in which I was interrupted by the most inexplicable
fits of yawning, I at length, in a sort of despair, communicated them
to our village club, from whom they found a more favourable reception
than the unlucky conformation of my nerves had been able to afford
them. They unanimously pronounced the work to be exceedingly good, and
assured me I would be guilty of the greatest possible injury to our
flourishing village, if I should suppress what threw such an
interesting and radiant light upon the history of the ancient
Monastery of Saint Mary.

At length, by dint of listening to their opinion, I became dubious of
my own; and, indeed, when I heard passages read forth by the sonorous
voice of our worthy pastor, I was scarce more tired than I have felt
myself at some of his own sermons. Such, and so great is the
difference betwixt reading a thing one's self, making toilsome way
through all the difficulties of manuscript, and, as the man says in
the play, "having the same read to you;"--it is positively like being
wafted over a creek in a boat, or wading through it on your feet, with
the mud up to your knees. Still, however, there remained the great
difficulty of finding some one who could act as editor, corrector at
once of the press and of the language, which, according to the
schoolmaster, was absolutely necessary.

Since the trees walked forth to choose themselves a king, never was an
honour so bandied about. The parson would not leave the quiet of his
chimney-corner--the bailie pleaded the dignity of his situation, and
the approach of the great annual fair, as reasons against going to
Edinburgh to make arrangements for printing the Benedictine's
manuscript. The schoolmaster alone seemed of malleable stuff; and,
desirous perhaps of emulating the fame of Jedediah Cleishbotham,
evinced a wish to undertake this momentous commission. But a
remonstrance from three opulent farmers, whose sons he had at bed,
board, and schooling, for twenty pounds per annum a-head, came like a
frost over the blossoms of his literary ambition, and he was compelled
to decline the service.

In these circumstances, sir, I apply to you, by the advice of our
little council of war, nothing doubting you will not be disinclined to
take the duty upon you, as it is much connected with that in which you
have distinguished yourself. What I request is, that you will review,
or rather revise and correct, the enclosed packet, and prepare it for
the press, by such alterations, additions, and curtailments, as you
think necessary. Forgive my hinting to you, that the deepest well may
be exhausted,--the best corps of grenadiers, as our old general of
brigade expressed himself, may be _used up_. A few hints can do
you no harm; and, for the prize-money, let the battle be first won,
and it shall be parted at the drum-head. I hope you will take nothing
amiss that I have said. I am a plain soldier, and little accustomed to
compliments. I may add, that I should be well contented to march in
the front with you--that is, to put my name with yours on the
title-page.  I have the honour to be, Sir, Your unknown humble
Servant, Cuthbert Clutterbuck.  Village of Kennaquhair, -- of April,
18--

_For the Author of "Waverley," &c.
care of Mr. John Ballantyne,
Hanover Street, Edinburgh._


       *       *        *       *        *


ANSWER BY "THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY,"

TO THE FOREGOING LETTER FROM CAPTAIN CLUTTERBUCK.


DEAR CAPTAIN,

Do not admire, that, notwithstanding the distance and ceremony of your
address, I return an answer in the terms of familiarity. The truth is,
your origin and native country are better known to me than even to
yourself.  You derive your respectable parentage, if I am not greatly
mistaken, from a land which has afforded much pleasure, as well as
profit, to those who have traded to it successfully,--I mean that part
of the _terra incognita_ which is called the province of Utopia.
Its productions, though censured by many (and some who use tea and
tobacco without scruple) as idle and unsubstantial luxuries, have
nevertheless, like many other luxuries, a general acceptation, and are
secretly enjoyed even by those who express the greatest scorn and
dislike of them in public. The dram-drinker is often the first to be
shocked at the smell of spirits--it is not unusual to hear old maiden
ladies declaim against scandal--the private book-cases of some
grave-seeming men would not brook decent eyes--and many, I say not of
the wise and learned, but of those most anxious to seem such, when the
spring-lock of their library is drawn, their velvet cap pulled over
their ears, their feet insinuated into their turkey slippers, are to
be found, were their retreats suddenly intruded upon, busily engaged
with the last new novel.

I have said, the truly wise and learned disdain these shifts, and will
open the said novel as avowedly as they would the lid of their
snuff-box. I will only quote one instance, though I know a hundred.
Did you know the celebrated Watt of Birmingham, Captain Clutterbuck? I
believe not, though, from what I am about to state, he would not have
failed to have sought an acquaintance with you. It was only once my
fortune to meet him, whether in body or in spirit it matters not.
There were assembled about half a score of our Northern Lights, who
had amongst them, Heaven knows how, a well-known character of your
country, Jedediah Cleishbotham.  This worthy person, having come to
Edinburgh during the Christmas vacation, had become a sort of lion in
the place, and was lead in leash from house to house along with the
guisards, the stone-eater, and other amusements of the season, which
"exhibited their unparalleled feats to private family-parties, if
required." Amidst this company stood Mr. Watt, the man whose genius
discovered the means of multiplying our national resources to a degree
perhaps even beyond his own stupendous powers of calculation and
combination; bringing the treasures of the abyss to the summit of the
earth--giving the feeble arm of man the momentum of an
Afrite--commanding manufactures to arise, as the rod of the prophet
produced water in the desert--affording the means of dispensing with
that time and tide which wait for no man, and of sailing without that
wind which defied the commands and threats of Xerxes himself.

[Footnote: Probably the ingenious author alludes to the national
adage:

  The king said sail,
  But the wind said no.

Our schoolmaster (who is also a land surveyor) thinks this whole
passage refers to Mr. Watt's improvements on the steam
engine.--_Note by Captain Clutterbuck_.]

This potent commander of the elements--this abridger of time and
space--this magician, whose cloudy machinery has produced a change on
the world, the effects of which, extraordinary as they are, are
perhaps only now beginning to be felt--was not only the most profound
man of science, the most successful combiner of powers and calculator
of numbers as adapted to practical purposes,--was not only one of the
most generally well-informed,--but one of the best and kindest of
human beings.

There he stood, surrounded by the little band I have mentioned of
Northern literati, men not less tenacious, generally speaking, of
their own fame and their own opinions, than the national regiments are
supposed to be jealous of the high character which they have won upon
service. Methinks I yet see and hear what I shall never see or hear
again. In his eighty-fifth year, the alert, kind, benevolent old man,
had his attention alive to every one's question, his information at
every one's command.

His talents and fancy overflowed on every subject. One gentleman was a
deep philologist--he talked with him on the origin of the alphabet as
if he had been coeval with Cadmus; another a celebrated critic,--you
would have said the old man had studied political economy and
belles-lettres all his life,--of science it is unnecessary to speak,
it was his own distinguished walk. And yet, Captain Clutterbuck, when
he spoke with your countryman Jedediah Cleishbotham, you would have
sworn he had been coeval with Claver'se and Burley, with the
persecutors and persecuted, and could number every shot the dragoons
had fired at the fugitive Covenanters. In fact, we discovered that no
novel of the least celebrity escaped his perusal, and that the gifted
man of science was as much addicted to the productions of your native
country, (the land of Utopia aforesaid,) in other words, as shameless
and obstinate a peruser of novels, as if he had been a very milliner's
apprentice of eighteen. I know little apology for troubling you with
these things, excepting the desire to commemorate a delightful
evening, and a wish to encourage you to shake off that modest
diffidence which makes you afraid of being supposed connected with the
fairy-land of delusive fiction. I will requite your tag of verse, from
Horace himself, with a paraphrase for your own use, my dear Captain,
and for that of your country club, excepting in reverence the
clergyman and schoolmaster:--

  _Ne sit ancillae tibi amor pudori, &c._

  Take thou no scorn.
  Of fiction born,
  Fair fiction's muse to woe;
  Old Homer's theme
  Was but a dream,
  Himself a fiction too.

Having told you your country, I must next, my dear Captain
Clutterbuck, make free to mention your own immediate descent. You are
not to suppose your land of prodigies so little known to us as the
careful concealment of your origin would seem to imply. But you have
it in common with many of your country, studiously and anxiously to
hide any connexion with it. There is this difference, indeed, betwixt
your countrymen and those of our more material world, that many of the
most estimable of them, such as an old Highland gentleman called
Ossian, a monk of Bristol called Rowley, and others, are inclined to
pass themselves off as denizens of the land of reality, whereas most
of our fellow-citizens who deny their country are such as that country
would be very willing to disclaim. The especial circumstances you
mention relating to your life and services, impose not upon us. We
know the versatility of the unsubstantial species to which you belong
permits them to assume all manner of disguises; we have seen them
apparelled in the caftan of a Persian, and the silken robe of a
Chinese, [Footnote: See the Persian Letters, and the Citizen of the
World.] and are prepared to suspect their real character under every
disguise. But how can we be ignorant of your country and manners, or
deceived by the evasion of its inhabitants, when the voyages of
discovery which have been made to it rival in number those recorded by
Purchas or by Hackluyt? [Footnote: See Les Voyages Imaginaires.] And
to show the skill and perseverance of your navigators and travellers,
we have only to name Sindbad, Aboulfouaris, and Robinson Crusoe. These
were the men for discoveries. Could we have sent Captain Greenland to
look out for the north-west passage, or Peter Wilkins to examine
Baffin's Bay, what discoveries might we not have expected? But there
are feats, and these both numerous and extraordinary, performed by the
inhabitants of your country, which we read without once attempting to
emulate.

I wander from my purpose, which was to assure you, that I know you as
well as the mother who _did_ not bear you, for MacDuff's
peculiarity sticks to your whole race. You are not born of woman,
unless, indeed, in that figurative sense, in which the celebrated
Maria Edgeworth may, in her state of single blessedness, be termed
mother of the finest family in England.  You belong, sir, to the
Editors of the land of Utopia, a sort of persons for whom I have the
highest esteem. How is it possible it should be otherwise, when you
reckon among your corporation the sage Cid Hamet Benengeli, the
short-faced president of the Spectator's Club, poor Ben Silton, and
many others, who have acted as gentlemen-ushers to works which have
cheered our heaviest, and added wings to our lightest hours?

What I have remarked as peculiar to Editors of the class in which I
venture to enrol you, is the happy combination of fortuitous
circumstances which usually put you in possession of the works which
you have the goodness to bring into public notice. One walks on the
sea-shore, and a wave casts on land a small cylindrical trunk or
casket, containing a manuscript much damaged with sea-water, which is
with difficulty deciphered, and so forth. [Footnote: See the History
of Automathes.] Another steps into a chandler's shop, to purchase a
pound of butter, and, behold! the waste-paper on which it is laid is
the manuscript of a cabalist. [Footnote: Adventures of a Guinea.] A
third is so fortunate as to obtain from a woman who lets lodgings, the
curious contents of an antique bureau, the property of a deceased
lodger. [Footnote: Adventures of an Atom.] All these are certainly
possible occurrences; but, I know not how, they seldom occur to any
Editors save those of your country.  At least I can answer for myself,
that in my solitary walks by the sea, I never saw it cast ashore any
thing but dulse and tangle, and now and then a deceased star-fish; my
landlady never presented me with any manuscript save her cursed bill;
and the most interesting of my discoveries in the way of waste-paper,
was finding a favourite passage of one of my own novels wrapt round an
ounce of snuff. No, Captain, the funds from which I have drawn my
power of amusing the public, have been bought otherwise than by
fortuitous adventure. I have buried myself in libraries to extract
from the nonsense of ancient days new nonsense of my own. I have
turned over volumes, which, from the pot-hooks I was obliged to
decipher, might have been the cabalistic manuscripts of Cornelius
Agrippa, although I never saw "the door open and the devil come in."
[Footnote: See Southey's Ballad on the Young Man who read in a
Conjuror's Books.] But all the domestic inhabitants of the libraries
were disturbed by the vehemence of my studies:--

  From my research the boldest spider fled,
  And moths, retreating, trembled as I read;

From this learned sepulchre I emerged like the Magician in the Persian
Tales, from his twelve-month's residence in the mountain, not like him
to soar over the heads of the multitude, but to mingle in the crowd,
and to elbow amongst the throng, making my way from the highest
society to the lowest, undergoing the scorn, or, what is harder to
brook, the patronizing condescension of the one, and enduring the
vulgar familiarity of the other,--and all, you will say, for
what?--to collect materials for one of those manuscripts with which
mere chance so often accommodates your country-men; in other words, to
write a successful novel.--"O Athenians, how hard we labour to deserve
your praise!"

I might stop here, my dear Clutterbuck; it would have a touching
effect, and the air of proper deference to our dear Public. But I will
not be false with you,--(though falsehood is--excuse the
observation--the current coin of your country,) the truth is, I have
studied and lived for the purpose of gratifying my own curiosity, and
passing my own time; and though the result has been, that, in one
shape or other, I have been frequently before the Public, perhaps more
frequently than prudence warranted, yet I cannot claim from them the
favour due to those who have dedicated their ease and leisure to the
improvement and entertainment of others.

Having communicated thus freely with you, my dear Captain, it follows,
of course, that I will gratefully accept of your communication, which,
as your Benedictine observed, divides itself both by subject, manner,
and age, into two parts. But I am sorry I cannot gratify your literary
ambition, by suffering your name to appear upon the title-page; and I
will candidly tell you the reason.

The Editors of your country are of such a soft and passive
disposition, that they have frequently done themselves great disgrace
by giving up the coadjutors who first brought them into public notice
and public favour, and suffering their names to be used by those
quacks and impostors who live upon the ideas of others. Thus I shame
to tell how the sage Cid Hamet Benengeli was induced by one Juan
Avellaneda to play the Turk with the ingenious Miguel Cervantes, and
to publish a Second Part of the adventures of his hero the renowned
Don Quixote, without the knowledge or co-operation of his principal
aforesaid. It is true, the Arabian sage returned to his allegiance,
and thereafter composed a genuine continuation of the Knight of La
Mancha, in which the said Avellaneda of Tordesillas is severely
chastised. For in this you pseudo-editors resemble the juggler's
disciplined ape, to which a sly old Scotsman likened James I., "if you
have Jackoo in your hand, you can make him bite me; if I have Jackoo
in my hand, I can make him bite you." Yet, notwithstanding the
_amende honorable_ thus made by Cid Hamet Benengeli, his
temporary defection did not the less occasion the decease of the
ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote, if he can be said to die, whose memory
is immortal. Cervantes put him to death, lest he should again fall
into bad hands. Awful, yet just consequence of Cid Hamet's defection!

To quote a more modern and much less important instance. I am sorry to
observe my old acquaintance Jedediah Cleishbotham has misbehaved
himself so far as to desert his original patron, and set up for
himself. I am afraid the poor pedagogue will make little by his new
allies, unless the pleasure of entertaining the public, and, for aught
I know, the gentlemen of the long robe, with disputes about his
identity.

[Footnote: I am since more correctly informed, that Mr. Cleishbotham
died some months since at Gandercleuch, and that the person assuming
his name is an impostor. The real Jedediah made a most Christian and
edifying end; and, as I am credibly informed, having sent for a
Cameronian clergyman when he was _in extremis_, was so fortunate
as to convince the good man, that, after all, he had no wish to bring
down on the scattered remnant of Mountain folks, "the bonnets of Bonny
Dundee." Hard that the speculators in print and paper will not allow a
good man to rest quiet in his grave.

This note, and the passages in the text, were occasioned by a London
bookseller having printed, as a Speculation, an additional collection
of Tales of My Landlord, which was not so fortunate as to succeed in
passing on the world as genuine.]

Observe, therefore, Captain Clutterbuck, that, wise by these great
examples, I receive you as a partner, but a sleeping partner only. As
I give you no title to employ or use the firm of the copartnery we are
about to form, I will announce my property in my title-page, and put
my own mark on my own chattels, which the attorney tells me it will be
a crime to counterfeit, as much as it would to imitate the autograph
of any other empiric--a crime amounting, as advertisements upon little
vials assure to us, to nothing short of felony.  If, therefore, my
dear friend, your name should hereafter appear in any title-page
without mine, readers will know what to think of you. I scorn to use
either arguments or threats; but you cannot but be sensible, that, as
you owe your literary existence to me on the one hand, so, on the
other, your very all is at my disposal. I can at pleasure cut off your
annuity, strike your name from the half-pay establishment, nay,
actually put you to death, without being answerable to any one. These
are plain words to a gentleman who has served during the whole war;
but, I am aware, you will take nothing amiss at my hands.

And now, my good sir, let us address ourselves to our task, and
arrange, as we best can, the manuscript of your Benedictine, so as to
suit the taste of this critical age. You will find I have made very
liberal use of his permission, to alter whatever seemed too favourable
to the Church of Rome, which I abominate, were it but for her fasts
and penances.

Our reader is doubtless impatient, and we must own, with John Bunyan,

  We have too long detain'd him in the porch,
  And kept him from the sunshine with a torch.

Adieu, therefore, my dear Captain--remember me respectfully to the
parson, the schoolmaster, and the bailie, and all friends of the happy
club in the village of Kennaquhair. I have never seen, and never shall
see, one of their faces; and notwithstanding, I believe that as yet I
am better acquainted with them than any other man who lives.--I shall
soon introduce you to my jocund friend, Mr. John Ballantyne of Trinity
Grove, whom you will find warm from his match at single-stick with a
brother Publisher. [Footnote: In consequence of the pseudo Tales of My
Landlord printed in London, as already mentioned, the late Mr. John
Ballantyne, the author's publisher, had a controversy with the
interloping bibliopolist, each insisting that his Jedediah
Cleishbotham was the real Simon Pure.] Peace to their differences! It
is a wrathful trade, and the _irritabile genus_ comprehends the
bookselling as well as the book-writing species.--Once more adieu!

THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.



       *       *       *       *       *

THE MONASTERY.




Chapter the First.


  O ay! the Monks, the Monks they did the mischief!
  Theirs all the grossness, all the superstition
  Of a most gross and superstitious age--
  May He be praised that sent the healthful tempest
  And scatter'd all these pestilential vapours!
  But that we owed them _all_ to yonder Harlot
  Throned on the seven hills with her cup of gold,
  I will as soon believe, with kind Sir Roger,
  That old Moll White took wing with cat arid broomstick,
  And raised the last night's thunder.
                                       OLD PLAY.

The village described in the Benedictine's manuscript by the name of
Kennaquhair, bears the same Celtic termination which occurs in
Traquhair, Caquhair, and other compounds. The learned Chalmers derives
this word Quhair, from the winding course of a stream; a definition
which coincides, in a remarkable degree, with the serpentine turns of
the river Tweed near the village of which we speak. It has been long
famous for the splendid Monastery of Saint Mary, founded by David the
First of Scotland, in whose reign were formed, in the same county, the
no less splendid establishments of Melrose, Jedburgh, and Kelso. The
donations of land with which the King endowed these wealthy
fraternities procured him from the Monkish historians the epithet of
Saint, and from one of his impoverished descendants the splenetic
censure, "that he had been a sore saint for the Crown."

It seems probable, notwithstanding, that David, who was a wise as well
as a pious monarch, was not moved solely by religious motives to those
great acts of munificence to the church, but annexed political views
to his pious generosity. His possessions in Northumberland and
Cumberland became precarious after the loss of the Battle of the
Standard; and since the comparatively fertile valley of Teviot-dale
was likely to become the frontier of his kingdom, it is probable he
wished to secure at least a part of these valuable possessions by
placing them in the hands of the monks, whose property was for a long
time respected, even amidst the rage of a frontier war. In this manner
alone had the King some chance of ensuring protection and security to
the cultivators of the soil; and, in fact, for several ages the
possessions of these Abbeys were each a sort of Goshen, enjoying the
calm light of peace and immunity, while the rest of the country,
occupied by wild clans and marauding barons, was one dark scene of
confusion, blood, and unremitted outrage.

But these immunities did not continue down to the union of the crowns.
Long before that period the wars betwixt England and Scotland had lost
their original character of international hostilities, and had become
on the part of the English, a struggle for subjugation, on that of the
Scots a desperate and infuriated defence of their liberties. This
introduced on both sides a degree of fury and animosity unknown to the
earlier period of their history; and as religious scruples soon gave
way to national hatred spurred by a love of plunder, the patrimony of
the Church was no longer sacred from incursions on either side. Still,
however, the tenants and vassals of the great Abbeys had many
advantages over those of the lay barons, who were harassed by constant
military duty, until they became desperate, and lost all relish for
the arts of peace. The vassals of the church, on the other hand, were
only liable to be called to arms on general occasions, and at other
times were permitted in comparative quiet to possess their farms and
feus. [Footnote: Small possessions conferred upon vassals and their
heirs, held for a small quit-rent, or a moderate proportion of the
produce. This was a favourite manner, by which the churchmen peopled
the patrimony of their convents; and many descendants of such
_feuars_, as they are culled, are still to be found in possession
of their family inheritances in the neighbourhood of the great
Monasteries of Scotland.] They of course exhibited superior skill in
every thing that related to the cultivation of the soil, and were
therefore both wealthier and better informed than the military
retainers of the restless chiefs and nobles in their neighbourhood.

The residence of these church vassals was usually in a small village
or hamlet, where, for the sake of mutual aid and protection, some
thirty or forty families dwelt together. This was called the Town, and
the land belonging to the various families by whom the Town was
inhabited, was called the Township. They usually possessed the land in
common, though in various proportions, according to their several
grants. The part of the Township properly arable, and kept as such
continually under the plough, was called _in-field_. Here the use
of quantities of manure supplied in some degree the exhaustion of the
soil, and the feuars raised tolerable oats and bear, [Footnote: Or
bigg, a kind of coarse barley.] usually sowed on alternate ridges, on
which the labour of the whole community was bestowed without
distinction, the produce being divided after harvest, agreeably to
their respective interests.

There was, besides, _out-field_ land, from which it was thought
possible to extract a crop now and then, after which it was abandoned
to the "skiey influences," until the exhausted powers of vegetation
were restored. These out-field spots were selected by any feuar at his
own choice, amongst the sheep-walks and hills which were always
annexed to the Township, to serve as pasturage to the community. The
trouble of cultivating these patches of out-field, and the precarious
chance that the crop would pay the  labour, were considered as giving
a right to any feuar, who chose to undertake the adventure, to the
produce which might result from it.

There remained the pasturage of extensive moors, where the valleys
often afforded good grass, and upon which the whole cattle belonging
to the community fed indiscriminately during the summer, under the
charge of the Town-herd, who regularly drove them out to pasture in
the morning, and brought them back at night, without which precaution
they would have fallen a speedy prey to some of the Snatchers in the
neighbourhood. These are things to make modern agriculturists hold up
their hands and stare; but the same mode of cultivation is not yet
entirely in desuetude in some distant parts of North Britain, and may
be witnessed in full force and exercise in the Zetland Archipelago.

The habitations of the church-feuars were not less primitive than
their agriculture. In each village or town were several small towers,
having battlements projecting over the side walls, and usually an
advanced angle or two with shot-holes for flanking the door-way, which
was always defended by a strong door of oak, studded with nails, and
often by an exterior grated door of iron. These small peel-houses were
ordinarily inhabited by the principal feuars and their families; but,
upon the alarm of approaching danger, the whole inhabitants thronged
from their own miserable cottages, which were situated around, to
garrison these points of defence. It was then no easy matter for a
hostile party to penetrate into the village, for the men were
habituated to the use of bows and fire-arms, and the towers being
generally so placed, that the discharge from one crossed that of
another, it was impossible to assault any of them individually.

The interior of these houses was usually sufficiently wretched, for it
would have been folly to have furnished them in a manner which could
excite the avarice of their lawless neighbours. Yet the families
themselves exhibited in their appearance a degree of comfort,
information, and independence, which could hardly have been expected.
Their in-field supplied them with bread and home-brewed ale, their
herds and flocks with beef and mutton (the extravagance of killing
lambs or calves was never thought of). Each family killed a mart, or
fat bullock, in November, which was salted up for winter use, to which
the good wife could, upon great occasions, add a dish of pigeons or a
fat capon,--the ill-cultivated garden afforded "lang-cale,"--and the
river gave salmon to serve as a relish during the season of Lent.

Of fuel they had plenty, for the bogs afforded turf; and the remains
of the abused woods continued to give them logs for burning, as well
as timber for the usual domestic purposes. In addition to these
comforts, the good-man would now and then sally forth to the
greenwood, and mark down a buck of season with his gun or his
cross-bow; and the Father Confessor seldom refused him absolution for
the trespass, if duly invited to take his share of the smoking haunch.
Some, still bolder, made, either with their own domestics, or by
associating themselves with the moss-troopers, in the language of
shepherds, "a start and overloup;" and the golden ornaments and silken
head-gear--worn by the females of one or two families of note, were
invidiously traced by their neighbours to such successful excursions.
This, however, was a more inexplicable crime in the eyes of the Abbot
and Community of Saint Mary's, than the borrowing one of the "gude
king's deer;" and they failed not to discountenance and punish, by
every means in their power, offences which were sure to lead to severe
retaliation upon the property of the church, and which tended to alter
the character of their peaceful vassalage.

As for the information possessed by those dependents of the Abbacies,
they might have been truly said to be better fed than taught, even
though their fare had been worse than it was. Still, however, they
enjoyed opportunities of knowledge from which others were excluded.
The monks were in general well acquainted with their vassals and
tenants, and familiar in the families of the better class among them,
where they were sure to be received with the respect due to their
twofold character of spiritual father and secular landlord. Thus it
often happened, when a boy displayed talents and inclination for
study, one of the brethren, with a view to his being bred to the
church, or out of good-nature, in order to pass away his own idle
time, if he had no better motive, initiated him into the mysteries of
reading and writing, and imparted to him such other knowledge as he
himself possessed. And the heads of these allied families, having more
time for reflection, and more skill, as well as stronger motives for
improving their small properties, bore amongst their neighbours the
character of shrewd, intelligent men, who claimed respect on account
of their comparative wealth, even while they were despised for a less
warlike and enterprising turn than the other Borderers. They lived as
much as they well could amongst themselves, avoiding the company of
others, and dreading nothing more than to be involved in the deadly
feuds and ceaseless contentions of the secular landholders.

Such is a general picture of these communities. During the fatal wars
in the commencement of Queen Mary's reign, they had suffered
dreadfully by the hostile invasions. For the English, now a Protestant
people, were so far from sparing the church-lands, that they forayed
them with more unrelenting severity than even the possessions of the
laity. But the peace of 1550 had restored some degree of tranquillity
to those distracted and harassed regions, and matters began again
gradually to settle upon the former footing. The monks repaired their
ravaged shrines--the feuar again roofed his small fortalice which the
enemy had ruined--the poor labourer rebuilt his cottage--an easy task,
where a few sods, stones, and some pieces of wood from the next copse,
furnished all the materials necessary. The cattle, lastly, were driven
out of the wastes and thickets in which the remnant of them had been
secreted; and the mighty bull moved at the head of his seraglio and
their followers, to take possession of their wonted pastures. There
ensued peace and quiet, the state of the age and nation considered, to
the Monastery of Saint Mary, and its dependencies, for several
tranquil years.




Chapter the Second.


  In yon lone vale his early youth was bred,
  Not solitary then--the bugle-horn
  Of fell Alecto often waked its windings,
  From where the brook joins the majestic river,
  To the wild northern bog, the curlew's haunt,
  Where oozes forth its first and feeble streamlet.
                                           OLD PLAY.

We have said, that most of the feuars dwelt in the village belonging
to their townships. This was not, however, universally the case. A
lonely tower, to which the reader must now be introduced, was at least
one exception to the general rule.

It was of small dimensions, yet larger than those which occurred in
the village, as intimating that, in case of assault, the proprietor
would have to rely upon his own unassisted strength. Two or three
miserable huts, at the foot of the fortalice, held the bondsmen and
tenants of the feuar. The site was a beautiful green knoll, which
started up suddenly in the very throat of a wild and narrow glen, and
which, being surrounded, except on one side, by the winding of a small
stream, afforded a position of considerable strength.

But the great security of Glendearg, for so the place was called, lay
in its secluded, and almost hidden situation. To reach the tower, it
was necessary to travel three miles up the glen, crossing about twenty
times the little stream, which, winding through the narrow valley,
encountered at every hundred yards the opposition of a rock or
precipitous bank on the one side, which altered its course, and caused
it to shoot off in an oblique direction to the other. The hills which
ascend on each side of this glen are very steep, and rise boldly over
the stream, which is thus imprisoned within their barriers. The sides
of the glen are impracticable for horse, and are only to be traversed
by means of the sheep-paths which lie along their sides. It would not
be readily supposed that a road so hopeless and so difficult could
lead to any habitation more important than the summer shealing of a
shepherd.

Yet the glen, though lonely, nearly inaccessible, and sterile, was not
then absolutely void of beauty. The turf which covered the small
portion of level ground on the sides of the stream, was as close and
verdant as if it had occupied the scythes of a hundred gardeners once
a-fortnight; and it was garnished with an embroidery of daisies and
wild flowers, which the scythes would certainly have destroyed. The
little brook, now confined betwixt closer limits, now left at large to
choose its course through the narrow valley, danced carelessly on from
stream to pool, light and unturbid, as that better class of spirits
who pass their way through life, yielding to insurmountable obstacles,
but as far from being subdued by them as the sailor who meets by
chance with an unfavourable wind, and shapes his course so as to be
driven back as little as possible.

The mountains, as they would have been called in England,
_Scottice_ the steep _braes_, rose abruptly over the little
glen, here presenting the gray face of a rock, from which the turf had
been peeled by the torrents, and there displaying patches of wood and
copse, which had escaped the waste of the cattle and the sheep of the
feuars, and which, feathering naturally up the beds of empty torrents,
or occupying the concave recesses of the bank, gave at once beauty and
variety to the landscape. Above these scattered woods rose the hill,
in barren, but purple majesty; the dark rich hue, particularly in
autumn, contrasting beautifully with the thickets of oak and birch,
the mountain ashes and thorns, the alders and quivering aspens, which
checquered and varied the descent, and not less with the dark-green
and velvet turf, which composed the level part of the narrow glen.

Yet, though thus embellished, the scene could neither be strictly
termed sublime nor beautiful, and scarcely even picturesque or
striking. But its extreme solitude pressed on the heart; the traveller
felt that uncertainty whither he was going, or in what so wild a path
was to terminate, which, at times, strikes more on the imagination
than the grand features of a show-scene, when you know the exact
distance of the inn where your dinner is bespoke, and at the moment
preparing. These are ideas, however, of a far later age; for at the
time we treat of, the picturesque, the beautiful, the sublime, and all
their intermediate shades, were ideas absolutely unknown to the
inhabitants and occasional visitors of Glendearg.

These had, however, attached to the scene feelings fitting the time.
Its name, signifying the Red Valley, seems to have been derived, not
only from the purple colour of the heath, with which the upper part of
the rising banks was profusely clothed, but also from the dark red
colour of the rocks, and of the precipitous earthen banks, which in
that country are called _scaurs_. Another glen, about the head of
Ettrick, has acquired the same name from similar circumstances; and
there are probably more in Scotland to which it has been given.

As our Glendearg did not abound in mortal visitants, superstition,
that it might not be absolutely destitute of inhabitants, had peopled
its recesses with beings belonging to another world. The savage and
capricious Brown Man of the Moors, a being which seems the genuine
descendant of the northern dwarfs, was supposed to be seen there
frequently, especially after the autumnal equinox, when the fogs were
thick, and objects not easily distinguished. The Scottish fairies,
too, a whimsical, irritable, and mischievous tribe, who, though at
times capriciously benevolent, were more frequently adverse to
mortals, were also supposed to have formed a residence in a
particularly wild recess of the glen, of which the real name was, in
allusion to that circumstance, _Corrie nan Shian_, which, in
corrupted Celtic, signifies the Hollow of the Fairies. But the
neighbours were more cautious in speaking about this place, and
avoided giving it a name, from an idea common then throughout all the
British and Celtic provinces of Scotland, and still retained in many
places, that to speak either good or ill of this capricious race of
imaginary beings, is to provoke their resentment, and that secrecy and
silence is what they chiefly desire from those who may intrude upon
their revels, or discover their haunts.

A mysterious terror was thus attached to the dale, which afforded
access from the broad valley of the Tweed, up the little glen we have
described, to the fortalice called the Tower of Glendearg. Beyond the
knoll, where, as we have said, the tower was situated, the hills grew
more steep, and narrowed on the slender brook, so as scarce to leave a
footpath; and there the glen terminated in a wild waterfall, where a
slender thread of water dashed in a precipitous line of foam over two
or three precipices. Yet farther in the same direction, and above
these successive cataracts, lay a wild and extensive morass,
frequented only by waterfowl, wide, waste, apparently almost
interminable, and serving in a great measure to separate the
inhabitants of the glen from those who lived to the northward.

To restless and indefatigable moss-troopers, indeed, these morasses
were well known, and sometimes afforded a retreat. They often rode
down the glen--called at this tower--asked and received
hospitality--but still with a sort of reserve on the part of its more
peaceful inhabitants, who entertained them as a party of
North-American Indians might be received by a new European settler, as
much out of fear as hospitality, while the uppermost wish of the
landlord is the speedy departure of the savage guests.

This had not always been the current of feeling in the little valley
and its tower. Simon Glendinning, its former inhabitant, boasted his
connexion by blood to that ancient family of Glendonwyne, on the
western border. He used to narrate, at his fireside, in the autumn
evenings, the feats of the family to which he belonged, one of whom
fell by the side of the brave Earl of Douglas at Otterbourne. On these
occasions Simon usually held upon his knee an ancient broadsword,
which had belonged to his ancestors before any of the family had
consented to accept a fief under the peaceful dominion of the monks of
St. Mary's. In modern days, Simon might have lived at ease on his own
estate, and quietly murmured against the fate that had doomed him to
dwell there, and cut off his access to martial renown. But so many
opportunities, nay so many calls there were for him, who in those days
spoke big, to make good his words by his actions, that Simon
Glendinning was soon under the necessity of marching with the men of
the Halidome, as it was called, of St. Mary's, in that disastrous
campaign which was concluded by the battle of Pinkie.

The Catholic clergy were deeply interested in that national quarrel,
the principal object of which was, to prevent the union of the infant
Queen Mary, with the son of the heretical Henry VIII. The Monks had
called out their vassals, under an experienced leader. Many of
themselves had taken arms, and marched to the field, under a banner
representing a female, supposed to personify the Scottish Church,
kneeling in the attitude of prayer, with the legend, _Afflictae
Sponsae ne obliviscaris_. [Footnote: Forget not the afflicted
spouse.]

The Scots, however, in all their wars, had more occasion for good and
cautious generals, than for excitation, whether political or
enthusiastic. Their headlong and impatient courage uniformly induced
them to rush into action without duly weighing either their own
situation, or that of their enemies, and the inevitable consequence
was frequent defeat. With the dolorous slaughter of Pinkie we have
nothing to do, excepting that, among ten thousand men of low and high
degree, Simon Glendinning, of the Tower of Glendearg, bit the dust, no
way disparaging in his death that ancient race from which he claimed
his descent.

When the doleful news, which spread terror and mourning through the
whole of Scotland, reached the Tower of Glendearg, the widow of Simon,
Elspeth Brydone by her family name, was alone in that desolate
habitation, excepting a hind or two, alike past martial and
agricultural labour, and the helpless widows and families of those who
had fallen with their master. The feeling of desolation was
universal;--but what availed it? The monks, their patrons and
protectors, were driven from their Abbey by the English forces, who
now overran the country, and enforced at least an appearance of
submission on the part of the inhabitants. The Protector, Somerset,
formed a strong camp among the ruins of the ancient Castle of
Roxburgh, and compelled the neighbouring country to come in, pay
tribute, and take assurance from him, as the phrase then went. Indeed,
there was no power of resistance remaining; and the few barons, whose
high spirit disdained even the appearance of surrender, could only
retreat into the wildest fastnesses of the country, leaving their
houses and property to the wrath of the English, who detached parties
everywhere to distress, by military exaction, those whose chiefs had
not made their submission. The Abbot and his community having
retreated beyond the Forth, their lands were severely forayed, as
their sentiments were held peculiarly inimical to the alliance with
England.

Amongst the troops detached on this service was a small party,
commanded by Stawarth Bolton, a captain in the English army, and full
of the blunt and unpretending gallantry and generosity which has so
often distinguished that nation. Resistance was in vain. Elspeth
Brydone, when she descried a dozen of horsemen threading their way up
the glen, with a man at their head, whose scarlet cloak, bright
armour, and dancing plume, proclaimed him a leader, saw no better
protection for herself than to issue from the iron grate, covered with
a long mourning veil, and holding one of her two sons in each hand, to
meet the Englishman--state her deserted condition--place the little
tower at his command--and beg for his mercy. She stated, in a few
brief words, her intention, and added, "I submit, because I have nae
means of resistance."

"And I do not ask your submission, mistress, for the same reason,"
replied the Englishman. "To be satisfied of your peaceful intentions
is all I ask; and, from what you tell me, there is no reason to doubt
them."

"At least, sir," said Elspeth Brydone, "take share of what our spence
and our garners afford. Your horses are tired--your folk want
refreshment."

"Not a whit--not a whit," answered the honest Englishman; "it shall
never be said we disturbed by carousal the widow of a brave soldier,
while she was mourning for her husband.--Comrades, face about.--Yet
stay," he added, checking his war-horse, "my parties are out in every
direction; they must have some token that your family are under my
assurance of safety.--Here, my little fellow," said he, speaking to
the eldest boy, who might be about nine or ten years old, "lend me thy
bonnet."

The child reddened, looked sulky, and hesitated, while the mother,
with many a _fye_ and _nay pshaw_, and such sarsenet
chidings as tender mothers give to spoiled children, at length
succeeded in snatching the bonnet from him, and handing it to the
English leader.

Stawarth Bolton took his embroidered red cross from his barret-cap,
and putting it into the loop of the boy's bonnet, said to the
mistress, (for the title of lady was not given to dames of her
degree,) "By this token, which all my people will respect, you will be
freed from any importunity on the part of our forayers." [Footnote: As
gallantry of all times and nations has the same mode of thinking and
acting, so it often expresses itself by the same symbols. In the civil
war 1745-6, a party of Highlanders, under a Chieftain of rank, came to
Rose Castle, the seat of the Bishop of Carlisle, but then occupied by
the family of Squire Dacre of Cumberland.  They demanded quarters,
which of course were not to be refused to armed men of a strange
attire and unknown language. But the domestic represented to the
captain of the mountaineers, that the lady of the mansion had been
just delivered of a daughter, and expressed her hope, that, under
these circumstances, his party would give as little trouble as
possible. "God forbid," said the gallant chief, "that I or mine should
be the means of adding to a lady's inconvenience at such a time. May I
request to see the infant?" The child was brought, and the Highlander,
taking his cockade out of his bonnet, and pinning it on the child's
breast, "That will be a token," he said, "to any of our people who may
come hither, that Donald McDonald of Kinloch-Moidart, has taken the
family of Rose Castle under his protection." The lady who received in
infancy this gage of Highland protection, is now Mary, Lady Clerk of
Pennycuik; and on the 10th of June still wears the cockade which was
pinned on her breast, with a white rose as a kindred decoration.] He
placed it on the boy's head; but it was no sooner there, than the
little fellow, his veins swelling, and his eyes shooting fire through
tears, snatched the bonnet from his head, and, ere his mother could
interfere, skimmed it into the brook. The other boy ran instantly to
fish it out again, threw it back to his brother, first taking out the
cross, which, with great veneration, he kissed and put into his bosom.
The Englishman was half diverted, half surprised, with the scene.

"What mean ye by throwing away Saint George's red cross?" said he to
the elder boy, in a tone betwixt jest and earnest.

"Because Saint George is a southern saint," said the child, sulkily.
"Good"--said Stawarth Bolton.--"And what did you mean by taking it out
of the brook again, my little fellow?" he demanded of the younger.
"Because the priest says it is the common sign of salvation to all
good Christians."

"Why, good again!" said the honest soldier. "I protest unto you,
mistress, I envy you these boys. Are they both yours?"

Stawarth Bolton had reason to put the question, for Halbert
Glendinning, the elder of the two, had hair as dark as the raven's
plumage, black eyes, large, bold, and sparkling, that glittered under
eyebrows of the same complexion; a skin deep embrowned, though it
could not be termed swarthy, and an air of activity, frankness, and
determination, far beyond his age.  On the other hand, Edward, the
younger brother, was light-haired, blue-eyed, and of fairer
complexion, in countenance rather pale, and not exhibiting that rosy
hue which colours the sanguine cheek of robust health. Yet the boy had
nothing sickly or ill-conditioned in his look, but was, on the
contrary, a fair and handsome child, with a smiling face, and mild,
yet cheerful eye.

The mother glanced a proud motherly glance, first at the one, and then
at the other, ere she answered the Englishman, "Surely, sir, they are
both my children."

"And by the same father, mistress?" said Stawarth; but, seeing a blush
of displeasure arise on her brow, he instantly added, "Nay, I mean no
offence; I would have asked the same question at any of my gossips in
merry Lincoln.--Well, dame, you have two fair boys; I would I could
borrow one, for Dame Bolton and I live childless in our old
hall.--Come, little fellows, which of you will go with me?"

The trembling mother, half-fearing as he spoke, drew the children
towards her, one with either hand, while they both answered the
stranger. "I will not go with you," said Halbert, boldly, "for you are
a false-hearted Southern; and the Southerns killed my father; and I
will war on you to the death, when I can draw my father's sword."

"God-a-mercy, my little levin-bolt," said Stawarth, "the goodly custom
of deadly feud will never go down in thy day, I presume.--And you, my
fine white-head, will you not go with me, to ride a cock-horse?"
"No," said Edward, demurely, "for you are a heretic."

"Why, God-a-mercy still!" said Stawarth Bolton. "Well, dame, I see I
shall find no recruits for my troop from you; and yet I do envy you
these two little chubby knaves." He sighed a moment, as was visible,
in spite of gorget and corslet, and then added, "And yet, my dame and
I would but quarrel which of the knaves we should like best; for I
should wish for the black-eyed rogue--and she, I warrant me, for that
blue-eyed, fair-haired darling. Natheless, we must brook our solitary
wedlock, and wish joy to those that are more fortunate. Sergeant
Brittson, do thou remain here till recalled--protect this family, as
under assurance--do them no wrong, and suffer no wrong to be done to
them, as thou wilt answer it.--Dame, Brittson is a married man, old
and steady; feed him on what you will, but give him not over much
liquor."

Dame Glendinning again offered refreshments, but with a faltering
voice, and an obvious desire her invitation should not be accepted.
The fact was, that, supposing her boys as precious in the eyes of the
Englishman as in her own, (the most ordinary of parental errors,) she
was half afraid, that the admiration he expressed of them in his blunt
manner might end in his actually carrying off one or other of the
little darlings whom he appeared to covet so much. She kept hold of
their hands, therefore, as if her feeble strength could have been of
service, had any violence been intended, and saw with joy she could
not disguise, the little party of horse countermarch, in order to
descend the glen. Her feelings did not escape Bolton: "I forgive you,
dame," he said, "for being suspicious that an English falcon was
hovering over your Scottish moor-brood. But fear not--those who have
fewest children have fewest cares; nor does a wise man covet those of
another household. Adieu, dame; when the black-eyed rogue is able to
drive a foray from England, teach him to spare women and children, for
the sake of Stawarth Bolton."

"God be with you, gallant Southern!" said Elspeth Glendinning, but not
till he was out of hearing, spurring on his good horse to regain the
head of his party, whose plumage and armour were now glancing and
gradually disappearing in the distance, as they winded down the glen.

"Mother," said the elder boy, "I will not say amen to a prayer for a
Southern."

"Mother," said the younger, more reverentially, "is it right to pray
for a heretic?"

"The God to whom I pray only knows," answered poor Elspeth; "but these
two words, Southern and heretic, have already cost Scotland ten
thousand of her best and bravest, and me a husband, and you a father;
and, whether blessing or banning, I never wish to hear them
more.--Follow me to the Place, sir," she said to Brittson, "and such
as we have to offer you shall be at your disposal."




Chapter the Third.


  They lighted down on Tweed water
    And blew their coals sae het,
  And fired the March and Teviotdale,
     All in an evening late.
                       AULD MAITLAND.

The report soon spread through the patrimony of Saint Mary's and its
vicinity, that the Mistress of Glendearg had received assurance from
the English Captain, and that her cattle were not to be driven off, or
her corn burned. Among others who heard this report, it reached the
ears of a lady, who, once much higher in rank than Elspeth
Glendinning, was now by the same calamity reduced to even greater
misfortune.

She was the widow of a brave soldier, Walter Avenel, descended of a
very ancient Border family, who once possessed immense estates in
Eskdale.  These had long since passed from them into other hands, but
they still enjoyed an ancient Barony of considerable extent, not very
far from the patrimony of Saint Mary's, and lying upon the same side
of the river with the narrow vale of Glendearg, at the head of which
was the little tower of the Glendinnings. Here they had lived, bearing
a respectable rank amongst the gentry of their province, though
neither wealthy nor powerful. This general regard had been much
augmented by the skill, courage, and enterprise which had been
displayed by Walter Avenel, the last Baron.

When Scotland began to recover from the dreadful shock she had
sustained after the battle of Pinkie-Cleuch, Avenel was one of the
first who, assembling a small force, set an example in those bloody
and unsparing skirmishes, which showed that a nation, though conquered
and overrun by invaders, may yet wage against them such a war of
detail as shall in the end become fatal to the foreigners. In one of
these, however, Walter Avenel fell, and the news which came to the
house of his fathers was followed by the distracting intelligence,
that a party of Englishmen were coming to plunder the mansion and
lands of his widow, in order, by this act of terror, to prevent others
from following the example of the deceased.

The unfortunate lady had no better refuge than the miserable cottage
of a shepherd among the hills, to which she was hastily removed,
scarce conscious where or for what purpose her terrified attendants
were removing her and her infant daughter from her own house. Here she
was tended with all the duteous service of ancient times by the
shepherd's wife, Tibb Tacket, who in better days had been her own
bowerwoman. For a time the lady was unconscious of her misery; but
when the first stunning effect of grief was so far passed away that
she could form an estimate of her own situation, the widow of Avenel
had cause to envy the lot of her husband in his dark and silent abode.
The domestics who had guided her to her place of refuge, were
presently obliged to disperse for their own safety, or to seek for
necessary subsistence; and the shepherd and his wife, whose poor
cottage she shared, were soon after deprived of the means of affording
their late mistress even that coarse sustenance which they had gladly
shared with her.  Some of the English forayers had discovered and
driven off the few sheep which had escaped the first researches of
their avarice. Two cows shared the fate of the remnant of their stock;
they had afforded the family almost their sole support, and now famine
appeared to stare them in the face.

"We are broken and beggared now, out and out," said old Martin the
shepherd--and he wrung his hands in the bitterness of agony, "the
thieves, the harrying thieves I not a cloot left of the haill hirsel!"

"And to see poor Grizzle and Crumbie," said his wife, "turning back
their necks to the byre, and routing while the stony-hearted villains
were brogging them on wi' their lances!"

"There were but four of them," said Martin, "and I have seen the day
forty wad not have ventured this length. But our strength and manhood
is gane with our puir maister."

"For the sake of the holy rood, whisht, man," said the goodwife, "our
leddy is half gane already, as ye may see by that fleightering of the
ee-lid--a word mair and she's dead outright."

"I could almost wish," said Martin, "we were a' gane, for what to do
passes my puir wit. I care little for mysell, or you, Tibb,--we can
make a fend--work or want--we can do baith, but she can do neither."

They canvassed their situation thus openly before the lady, convinced
by the paleness of her look, her quivering lip, and dead-set eye, that
she neither heard nor understood what they were saying.

"There is a way," said the shepherd, "but I kenna if she could bring
her heart to it,--there's Simon Glendinning's widow of the glen
yonder, has had assurance from the Southern loons, and nae soldier to
steer them for one cause or other. Now, if the leddy could bow her
mind to take quarters with Elspeth Glendinning till better days cast
up, nae doubt it wad be doing an honour to the like of her, but----"

"An honour," answered Tibb, "ay, by my word, sic an honour as wad be
pride to her kin mony a lang year after her banes were in the mould.
Oh! gudeman, to hear ye even the Lady of Avenel to seeking quarters
wi' a Kirk-vassal's widow!"

"Loath should I be to wish her to it," said Martin; "but what may we
do?--to stay here is mere starvation; and where to go, I'm sure I ken
nae mair than ony tup I ever herded."

"Speak no more of it," said the widow of Avenel, suddenly joining in the
conversation, "I will go to the tower.--Dame Elspeth is of good folk, a
widow, and the mother of orphans,--she will give us house-room until
something be thought upon. These evil showers make the low bush better
than no bield."

"See there, see there," said Martin, "you see the leddy has twice our
sense."

"And natural it is," said Tibb, "seeing that she is convent-bred, and
can lay silk broidery, forby white-seam and shell-work."

"Do you not think," said the lady to Martin, still clasping her child to
her bosom and making it clear from what motives she desired the refuge,
"that Dame Glendinning will make us welcome?"

"Blithely welcome, blithely welcome, my leddy," answered Martin,
cheerily, "and we shall deserve a welcome at her hand. Men are scarce
now, my leddy, with these wars; and gie me a thought of time to it, I
can do as good a day's darg as ever I did in my life, and Tibb can
sort cows with ony living woman."

"And muckle mair could I do," said Tibb, "were it ony feasible house;
but there will be neither pearlins to mend, nor pinners to busk up, in
Elspeth Glendinning's."

"Whisht wi' your pride, woman," said the shepherd; "eneugh you can do,
baith outside and inside, an ye set your mind to it; and hard it is if
we twa canna work for three folk's meat, forby my dainty wee leddy
there.  Come awa, come awa, nae use in staying here langer; we have
five Scots miles over moss and muir, and that is nae easy walk for a
leddy born and bred."

Household stuff there was little or none to remove or care for; an old
pony which had escaped the plunderers, owing partly to its pitiful
appearance, partly from the reluctance which it showed to be caught by
strangers, was employed to carry the few blankets and other trifles
which they possessed. When Shagram came to his master's well-known
whistle, he was surprised to find the poor thing had been wounded,
though slightly, by an arrow, which one of the forayers had shot off
in anger after he had long chased it in vain.

"Ay, Shagram," said the old man, as he applied something to the wound,
"must you rue the lang-bow as weel as all of us?"

"What corner in Scotland rues it not!" said the Lady of Avenel.

"Ay, ay, madam," said Martin, "God keep the kindly Scot from the
cloth-yard shaft, and he will keep himself from the handy stroke. But
let us go our way; the trash that is left I can come back for. There
is nae ane to stir it but the good neighbours, and they----"

"For the love of God, goodman," said his wife, in a remonstrating tone,
"haud your peace! Think what ye're saying, and we hae sae muckle wild
land to go over before we win to the girth gate."

The husband nodded acquiescence; for it was deemed highly imprudent to
speak of the fairies, either by their title of _good neighbours_
or by any other, especially when about to pass the places which they
were supposed to haunt.

[Footnote: This superstition continues to prevail, though one would
suppose it must now be antiquated. It is only a year or two since an
itinerant puppet show-man, who, disdaining to acknowledge the
profession of Gines de Passamonte, called himself an artist from
Vauxhall, brought a complaint of a singular nature before the author,
as Sheriff of Selkirkshire. The singular dexterity with which the
show-man had exhibited the machinery of his little stage, had, upon a
Selkirk fair-day, excited the eager curiosity of some mechanics of
Galashiels. These men, from no worse motive that could be discovered
than a thirst after knowledge beyond their sphere, committed a
burglary upon the barn in which the puppets had been consigned to
repose, and carried them off in the nook of their plaids, when
returning from Selkirk to their own village.

  "But with the morning cool reflection came."

The party found, however, they could not make Punch dance, and that
the whole troop were equally intractable; they had also, perhaps, some
apprehensions of the Rhadamanth of the district; and, willing to be
quit of their booty, they left the puppets seated in a grove by the
side of the Ettrick, where they were sure to be touched by the first
beams of the rising sun. Here a shepherd, who was on foot with sunrise
to pen his master's sheep on a field of turnips, to his utter
astonishment, saw this train, profusely gay, sitting in the little
grotto. His examination proceeded thus:--

_Sheriff_. You saw these gay-looking things? what did you think
they were?

_Shepherd_. Ou, I am no that free to say what I might think they
were.

_Sheriff_. Come, lad, I must have a direct answer--who did you
think they were?

_Shepherd_. Ou, sir, troth I am no that free to say that I mind
wha I might think they were.

_Sheriff_. Come, come sir! I ask you distinctly, did you think
they were the fairies you saw?

_Shepherd_. Indeed, sir, and I winna say but I might think it was
the Good Neighbours.

Thus unwillingly was he brought to allude to the irritable and
captious inhabitants of fairy land.]

They set forward on their pilgrimage on the last day of October. "This
is thy birthday, my sweet Mary," said the mother, as a sting of bitter
recollection crossed her mind. "Oh, who could have believed that the
head, which, a few years since, was cradled amongst so many rejoicing
friends, may perhaps this night seek a cover in vain!"

The exiled family then set forward,--Mary Avenel, a lovely girl between
five and six years old, riding gipsy fashion upon Shagram, betwixt two
bundles of bedding; the Lady of Avenel walking by the animal's side;
Tibb leading the bridle, and old Martin walking a little before, looking
anxiously around him to explore the way.

Martin's task as guide, after two or three miles' walking, became more
difficult than he himself had expected, or than he was willing to
avow. It happened that the extensive range of pasturage, with which he
was conversant, lay to the west, and to get into the little valley of
Glendearg he had to proceed easterly. In the wilder districts of
Scotland, the passage from one vale to another, otherwise than by
descending that which you leave, and reascending the other, is often
very difficult.--Heights and hollows, mosses and rocks intervene, and
all those local impediments which throw a traveller out of his course.
So that Martin, however sure of his general direction, became
conscious, and at length was forced reluctantly to admit, that he had
missed the direct road to Glendearg, though he insisted they must be
very near it. "If we can but win across this wide bog," he said, "I
shall warrant ye are on the top of the tower." But to get across the
bog was a point of no small difficulty. The farther they ventured into
it, though proceeding with all the caution which Martin's experience
recommended, the more unsound the ground became, until, after they had
passed some places of great peril, their best argument for going
forward came to be, that they had to encounter equal danger in
returning.  The Lady of Avenel had been tenderly nurtured, but what
will not a woman endure when her child is in danger? Complaining less
of the dangers of the road than her attendants, who had been inured to
such from their infancy, she kept herself close by the side of the
pony, watching its every footstep, and ready, if it should flounder in
the morass, to snatch her little Mary from its back. At length they
came to a place where the guide greatly hesitated, for all around him
was broken lumps of heath, divided from each other by deep sloughs of
black tenacious mire. After great consideration, Martin, selecting
what he thought the safest path, began himself to lead forward
Shagram, in order to afford greater security to the child. But Shagram
snorted, laid his ears back, stretched his two feet forward, and drew
his hind feet under him, so as to adopt the best possible posture for
obstinate resistance, and refused to move one yard in the direction
indicated. Old Martin, much puzzled, now hesitated whether to exert
his absolute authority, or to defer to the contumacious obstinacy of
Shagram, and was not greatly comforted by his wife's observation, who,
seeing Shagram stare with his eyes, distend his nostrils, and tremble
with terror, hinted that "he surely saw more than they could see."

In this dilemma, the child suddenly exclaimed--"Bonny leddy signs to
us to come yon gate." They all looked in the direction where the child
pointed, but saw nothing, save a wreath, of rising mist, which fancy
might form into a human figure; but which afforded to Martin only the
sorrowful conviction, that the danger of their situation was about to
be increased by a heavy fog. He once more essayed to lead forward
Shagram; but the animal was inflexible in its determination not to
move in the direction Martin recommended. "Take your awn way for it,
then," said Martin, "and let us see what you can do for us."

Shagram, abandoned to the discretion of his own free-will, set off
boldly in the direction the child had pointed. There was nothing
wonderful in this, nor in its bringing them safe to the other side of
the dangerous morass; for the instinct of these animals in traversing
bogs is one of the most curious parts of their nature, and is a fact
generally established.  But it was remarkable, that the child more
than once mentioned the beautiful lady and her signals, and that
Shagram seemed to be in the secret, always moving in the same
direction which she indicated. The Lady of Avenel took little notice
at the time, her mind being probably occupied by the instant danger;
but her attendants changed expressive looks with each other more than
once.

"All-Hallow Eve!" said Tibb, in a whisper to Martin.

"For the mercy of Our Lady, not a word of that now!" said Martin in
reply. "Tell your beads, woman, if you cannot be silent."

When they got once more on firm ground, Martin recognized certain
land-marks, or cairns, on the tops of the neighbouring hills, by which
he was enabled to guide his course, and ere long they arrived at the
Tower of Glendearg.

It was at the sight of this little fortalice that the misery of her
lot pressed hard on the poor Lady of Avenel. When by any accident they
had met at church, market, or other place of public resort, she
remembered the distant and respectful air with which the wife of the
warlike baron was addressed by the spouse of the humble feuar. And
now, so much was her pride humbled, that she was to ask to share the
precarious safety of the same feuar's widow, and her pittance of food,
which might perhaps be yet more precarious. Martin probably guessed
what was passing in her mind, for he looked at her with a wistful
glance, as if to deprecate any change of resolution; and answering to
his looks, rather than his words, she said, while the sparkle of
subdued pride once more glanced from her eye, "If it were for myself
alone, I could but die-but for this infant--the last pledge of
Avenel--"

"True, my lady," said Martin, hastily; and, as if to prevent the
possibility of her retracting, he added, "I will step on and see Dame
Elspeth--I kend her husband weel, and have bought and sold with him,
for as great a man as he was."

Martin's tale was soon told, and met all acceptance from her companion
in misfortune. The Lady of Avenel had been meek and courteous in her
prosperity; in adversity, therefore, she met with the greatest
sympathy.  Besides, there was a point of pride in sheltering and
supporting a woman of such superior birth and rank; and, not to do
Elspeth Glendinning injustice, she felt sympathy for one whose fate
resembled her own in so many points, yet was so much more severe.
Every species of hospitality was gladly and respectfully extended to
the distressed travellers, and they were kindly requested to stay as
long at Glendearg as their circumstances rendered necessary, or their
inclination prompted.




Chapter the Fourth.


   Ne'er be I found by thee unawed,
   On that thrice hallow'd eve abroad.
   When goblins haunt from flood and fen,
                         The steps of men.
                            COLLINS'S _Ode to Fear_.

As the country became more settled, the Lady of Avenel would have
willingly returned to her husband's mansion. But that was no longer in
her power. It was a reign of minority, when the strongest had the best
right, and when acts of usurpation were frequent amongst those who had
much power and little conscience.

Julian Avenel, the younger brother of the deceased Walter, was a
person of this description. He hesitated not to seize upon his
brother's house and lands, so soon as the retreat of the English
permitted him. At first, he occupied the property in the name of his
niece; but when the lady proposed to return with her child to the
mansion of its fathers, he gave her to understand, that Avenel, being
a male fief, descended to the brother, instead of the daughter, of the
last possessor.  The ancient philosopher declined a dispute with the
emperor who commanded twenty legions, and the widow of Walter Avenel
was in no condition to maintain a contest with the leader of twenty
moss-troopers. Julian was also a man of service, who could back a
friend in case of need, and was sure, therefore, to find protectors
among the ruling powers. In short, however clear the little Mary's
right to the possessions of her father, her mother saw the necessity
of giving way, at least for the time, to the usurpation of her uncle.

Her patience and forbearance were so far attended with advantage, that
Julian, for very shame's sake, could no longer suffer her to be
absolutely dependant on the charity of Elspeth Glendinning. A drove of
cattle and a bull (which were probably missed by some English farmer)
were driven to the pastures of Glendearg; presents of raiment and
household stuff were sent liberally, and some little money, though
with a more sparing hand: for those in the situation of Julian Avenel
could come more easily by the goods, than the representing medium of
value, and made their payments chiefly in kind.

In the meantime, the widows of Walter Avenel and Simon Glendinning had
become habituated to each other's society, and were unwilling to part.
The lady could hope no more secret and secure residence than in the
Tower of Glendearg, and she was now in a condition to support her
share of the mutual housekeeping. Elspeth, on the other hand, felt
pride, as well as pleasure, in the society of a guest of such
distinction, and was at all times willing to pay much greater
deference than the Lady of Walter Avenel could be prevailed on to
accept.

Martin and his wife diligently served the united family in their
several vocations, and yielded obedience to both mistresses, though
always considering themselves as the especial servants of the Lady of
Avenel. This distinction sometimes occasioned a slight degree of
difference between Dame Elspeth and Tibb; the former being jealous of
her own consequence, and the latter apt to lay too much stress upon
the rank and family of her mistress.  But both were alike desirous to
conceal such petty squabbles from the lady, her hostess scarce
yielding to her old domestic in respect for her person. Neither did
the difference exist in such a degree as to interrupt the general
harmony of the family, for the one wisely gave way as she saw the
other become warm; and Tibb, though she often gave the first
provocation, had generally the sense to be the first in relinquishing
the argument.

The world which lay beyond was gradually forgotten by the inhabitants
of this sequestered glen, and unless when she attended mass at the
Monastery Church upon some high holiday, Alice of Avenel almost forgot
that she once held an equal rank with the proud wives of the
neighbouring barons and nobles who on such occasions crowded to the
solemnity. The recollection gave her little pain. She loved her
husband for himself, and in his inestimable loss all lesser subjects
of regret had ceased to interest her. At times, indeed, she thought of
claiming the protection of the Queen Regent (Mary of Guise) for her
little orphan, but the fear of Julian Avenel always came between. She
was sensible that he would have neither scruple nor difficulty in
spiriting away the child, (if he did not proceed farther,) should he
once consider its existence as formidable to his interest. Besides, he
led a wild and unsettled life, mingling in all feuds and forays,
wherever there was a spear to be broken; he evinced no purpose of
marrying, and the fate which he continually was braving might at
length remove him from his usurped inheritance. Alice of Avenel,
therefore, judged it wise to check all ambitious thoughts for the
present, and remain quiet in the rude, but peaceable retreat, to which
Providence had conducted her.

It was upon an All-Hallow's eve, when the family had resided together
for the space of three years, that the domestic circle was assembled
round the blazing turf-fire, in the old narrow hall of the Tower of
Glendearg. The idea of the master or mistress of the mansion feeding
or living apart from their domestics, was at this period never
entertained. The highest end of the board, the most commodious settle
by the fire,--these were the only marks of distinction; and the
servants mingled, with deference indeed, but unreproved and with
freedom, in whatever conversation was going forward.  But the two or
three domestics, kept merely for agricultural purposes, had retired to
their own cottages without, and with them a couple of wenches, usually
employed within doors, the daughters of one of the hinds.

After their departure, Martin locked, first, the iron grate; and,
secondly, the inner door of the tower, when the domestic circle was
thus arranged.  Dame Elspeth sate pulling the thread from her distaff;
Tibb watched the progress of scalding the whey, which hung in a large
pot upon the _crook_, a chain terminated by a hook, which was
suspended in the chimney to serve the purpose of the modern crane.
Martin, while busied in repairing some of the household articles, (for
every man in those days was his own carpenter and smith, as well as
his own tailor and shoemaker,) kept from time to time a watchful eye
upon the three children.

They were allowed, however, to exercise their juvenile restlessness by
running up and down the hall, behind the seats of the elder members of
the family, with the privilege of occasionally making excursions into
one or two small apartments which opened from it, and gave excellent
opportunity to play at hide-and-seek. This night, however, the
children seemed not disposed to avail themselves of their privilege of
visiting these dark regions, but preferred carrying on their gambols
in the vicinity of the light.

In the meanwhile, Alice of Avenel, sitting close to an iron
candlestick, which supported a misshapen torch of domestic
manufacture, read small detached passages from a thick clasped volume,
which she preserved with the greatest care. The art of reading the
lady had acquired by her residence in a nunnery during her youth, but
she seldom, of late years, put it to any other use than perusing this
little volume, which formed her whole library.  The family listened to
the portions which she selected, as to some good thing which there was
a merit in hearing with respect, whether it was fully understood or
no. To her daughter, Alice of Avenel had determined to impart their
mystery more fully, but the knowledge was at that period attended with
personal danger, and was not rashly to be trusted to a child.

The noise of the romping children interrupted, from time to time, the
voice of the lady, and drew on the noisy culprits the rebuke of Elspeth.

"Could they not go farther a-field, if they behoved to make such a
din, and disturb the lady's good words?" And this command was backed
with the threat of sending the whole party to bed if it was not
attended to punctually.  Acting under the injunction, the children
first played at a greater distance from the party, and more quietly,
and then began to stray into the adjacent apartments, as they became
impatient of the restraint to which they were subjected. But, all at
once, the two boys came open-mouthed into the hall, to tell that there
was an armed man in the spence.

"It must be Christie of Clint-hill," said Martin, rising; "what can have
brought him here at this time?"

"Or how came he in?" said Elspeth.

"Alas! what can he seek?" said the Lady of Avenel, to whom this man, a
retainer of her husband's brother, and who sometimes executed his
commissions at Glendearg, was an object of secret apprehension and
suspicion.  "Gracious heavens!" she added, rising up, "where is my
child?" All rushed to the spence, Halbert Glendinning first arming
himself with a rusty sword, and the younger seizing upon the lady's
book. They hastened to the spence, and were relieved of a part of
their anxiety by meeting Mary at the door of the apartment. She did
not seem in the slightest degree alarmed, or disturbed. They rushed
into the spence, (a sort of interior apartment in which the family ate
their victuals in the summer season,) but there was no one there.

"Where is Christie of Clint-hill?" said Martin.

"I do not know," said little Mary; "I never saw him."

"And what made you, ye misleard loons," said Dame Elspeth to her two
boys, "come yon gate into the ha', roaring like bullsegs, to frighten
the leddy, and her far frae strong?" The boys looked at each other in
silence and confusion, and their mother proceeded with her lecture.
"Could ye find nae night for daffin but Hallowe'en, and nae time but
when the leddy was reading to us about the holy Saints? May ne'er be
in my fingers, if I dinna sort ye baith for it!" The eldest boy bent
his eyes on the ground, the younger began to weep, but neither spoke;
and the mother would have proceeded to extremities, but for the
interposition of the little maiden.

"Dame Elspeth, it was _my_ fault--I did say to them, that I saw a
man in the spence."

"And what made you do so, child," said her mother, "to startle us all
thus?"

"Because," said Mary, lowering her voice, "I could not help it."

"Not help it, Mary!--you occasioned all this idle noise, and you could
not help it? How mean you by that, minion?"

"There really was an armed man in this spence," said Mary; "and
because I was surprised to see him, I cried out to Halbert and Edward--"

"She has told it herself," said Halbert Glendinning, "or it had never
been told by me."

"Nor by me neither," said Edward, emulously.

"Mistress Mary," said Elspeth, "you never told us anything before that
was not true; tell us if this was a Hallowe'en cantrip, and make an
end of it." The Lady of Avenel looked as if she would have interfered,
but knew not how; and Elspeth, who was too eagerly curious to regard
any distant hint, persevered in her inquiries. "Was it Christie of the
Clint-hill?--I would not for a mark that he were about the house, and
a body no ken whare."

"It was not Christie," said Mary; "it was--it was a gentleman--a
gentleman with a bright breastplate, like what I hae seen langsyne,
when we dwelt at Avenel--"

"What like was he?" continued Tibb, who now took share in the
investigation.

"Black-haired, black-eyed, with a peaked black beard," said the child;
"and many a fold of pearling round his neck, and hanging down his
breast ower his breastplate; and he had a beautiful hawk, with silver
bells, standing on his left hand, with a crimson silk hood upon its
head--"

"Ask her no more questions, for the love of God," said the anxious
menial to Elspeth, "but look to my leddy!" But the Lady of Avenel,
taking Mary in her hand, turned hastily away, and, walking into the
hall, gave them no opportunity of remarking in what manner she
received the child's communication, which she thus cut short. What
Tibb thought of it appeared from her crossing herself repeatedly, and
whispering into Elspeth's ear, "Saint Mary preserve us!--the lassie
has seen her father!"

When they reached the hall, they found the lady holding her daughter
on her knee, and kissing her repeatedly. When they entered, she again
arose, as if to shun observation, and retired to the little apartment
where her child and she occupied the same bed.

The boys were also sent to their cabin, and no one remained by the
hall fire save the faithful Tibb and dame Elspeth, excellent persons
both, and as thorough gossips as ever wagged a tongue.

It was but natural that they should instantly resume the subject of the
supernatural appearance, for such they deemed it, which had this night
alarmed the family.

"I could hae wished it had been the deil himself--be good to and
preserve us!--rather than Christie o' the Clint-hill," said the matron
of the mansion, "for the word runs rife in the country, that he is ane
of the maist masterfu' thieves ever lap on horse."

"Hout-tout, Dame Elspeth," said Tibb, "fear ye naething frae Christie;
tods keep their ain holes clean. You kirk-folk make sic a fasherie
about men shifting a wee bit for their living! Our Border-lairds would
ride with few men at their back, if a' the light-handed lads were out
o' gate."

"Better they rade wi' nane than distress the country-side the gate they
do," said Dame Elspeth.

"But wha is to haud back the Southron, then," said Tibb, "if ye take
away the lances and broadswords? I trow we auld wives couldna do that
wi' rock and wheel, and as little the monks wi' bell and book."

"And sae weel as the lances and broadswords hae kept them back, I
trow!--I was mair beholden to ae Southron, and that was Stawarth
Bolton, than to a' the border-riders ever wore Saint Andrew's cross--I
reckon their skelping back and forward, and lifting honest men's gear,
has been a main cause of a' the breach between us and England, and I
am sure that cost me a kind goodman. They spoke about the wedding of
the Prince and our Queen, but it's as like to be the driving of the
Cumberland folk's stocking that brought them down on us like dragons."
Tibb would not have failed in other circumstances to answer what she
thought reflections disparaging to her country folk; but she
recollected that Dame Elspeth was mistress of the family, curbed her
own zealous patriotism, and hastened to change the subject.

"And is it not strange," she said, "that the heiress of Avenel should
have seen her father this blessed night?"

"And ye think it was her father, then?" said Elspeth Glendinning.

"What else can I think?" said Tibb.

"It may hae been something waur, in his likeness," said Dame
Glendinning.

"I ken naething about that," said Tibb,--"but his likeness it was,
that I will be sworn to, just as he used to ride out a-hawking; for
having enemies in the country, he seldom laid off the breast-plate;
and for my part," added Tibb, "I dinna think a man looks like a man
unless he has steel on his breast, and by his side too."

"I have no skill of your harness on breast or side either," said Dame
Glendinning; "but I ken there is little luck in Hallowe'en sights, for I
have had ane myself."

"Indeed, Dame Elspeth?" said old Tibb, edging her stool closer to the
huge elbow-chair occupied by her friend, "I should like to hear about
that."

"Ye maun ken, then, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "that when I was
a hempie of nineteen or twenty, it wasna my fault if I wasna at a' the
merry-makings time about."

"That was very natural," said Tibb; "but ye hae sobered since that, or
ye wadna haud our braw gallants sae lightly."

"I have had that wad sober me or ony ane," said the matron, "Aweel,
Tibb, a lass like me wasna to lack wooers, for I wasna sae
ill-favoured that the tikes wad bark after me."

"How should that be," said Tibb, "and you sic a weel-favoured woman
to this day?"

"Fie, fie, cummer," said the matron of Glendearg, hitching her seat of
honour, in her turn, a little nearer to the cuttle-stool on which Tibb
was seated; "weel-favoured is past my time of day; but I might pass
then, for I wasna sae tocherless but what I had a bit land at my
breast-lace. My father was portioner of Little-dearg."

"Ye hae tell'd me that before," said Tibb; "but anent the Hallowe'en?"

"Aweel, aweel, I had mair joes than ane, but I favoured nane o' them;
and sae, at Hallowe'en, Father Nicolas the cellarer--he was cellarer
before this father, Father Clement, that now is--was cracking his nuts
and drinking his brown beer with us, and as blithe as might be, and
they would have me try a cantrip to ken wha suld wed me: and the monk
said there was nae ill in it, and if there was, he would assoil me for
it. And wha but I into the barn to winnow my three weights o'
naething--sair, sair my mind misgave me for fear of wrang-doing and
wrang-suffering baith; but I had aye a bauld spirit. I had not
winnowed the last weight clean out, and the moon was shining bright
upon the floor, when in stalked the presence of my dear Simon
Glendinning, that is now happy. I never saw him plainer in my life
than I did that moment; he held up an arrow as he passed me, and I
swarf'd awa wi' fright. Muckle wark there was to bring me to mysell
again, and sair they tried to make me believe it was a trick of Father
Nicolas and Simon between them, and that the arrow was to signify
Cupid's shaft, as the Father called it; and mony a time Simon wad
threep it to me after I was married--gude man, he liked not it should
be said that he was seen out o' the body!--But mark the end o' it,
Tibb; we were married, and the gray-goose wing was the death o' him
after a'!"

"As it has been of ower mony brave men," said Tibb; "I wish there
wasna sic a bird as a goose in the wide warld, forby the clecking that
we hae at the burn-side."

"But tell me, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "what does your leddy aye
do reading out o' that thick black book wi' the silver clasps?--there
are ower mony gude words in it to come frae ony body but a priest--An
it were about Robin Hood, or some o' David Lindsay's ballants, ane wad
ken better what to say to it. I am no misdoubting your mistress nae
way, but I wad like ill to hae a decent house haunted wi' ghaists and
gyrecarlines."

"Ye hae nae reason to doubt my leddy, or ony thing she says or does,
Dame Glendinning," said the faithful Tibb, something offended; "and
touching the bairn, it's weel kend she was born on Hallowe'en, was nine
years gane, and they that are born on Hallowe'en whiles see mair than
ither folk."

"And that wad be the cause, then, that the bairn didna mak muckle din
about what it saw?--if it had been my Halbert himself, forby Edward,
who is of softer nature, he wad hae yammered the haill night of a
constancy.  But it's like Mistress Mary hae sic sights mair natural to
her."

"That may weel be," said Tibb; "for on Hallowe'en she was born, as I
tell ye, and our auld parish priest wad fain hae had the night ower,
and All-Hallow day begun. But for a' that, the sweet bairn is just
like ither bairns, as ye may see yourself; and except this blessed
night, and ance before when we were in that weary bog on the road
here, I kenna that it saw mair than ither folk."

"But what saw she in the bog, then," said Dame Glendinning, "forby
moor-cocks and heather-blutters?"

"The wean saw something like a white leddy that weised us the gate,"
said Tibb; "when we were like to hae perished in the moss-hags--
certain it was that Shagram reisted, and I ken Martin thinks he saw
something."

"And what might the white leddy be?" said Elspeth; "have ye ony
guess o' that?"

"It's weel kend that, Dame Elspeth," said Tibb; "if ye had lived under
grit folk, as I hae dune, ye wadna be to seek in that matter."

"I hae aye keepit my ain ha' house abune my head," said Elspeth, not
without emphasis, "and if I havena lived wi' grit folk, grit folk have
lived wi' me."

"Weel, weel, dame," said Tibb, "your pardon's prayed, there was nae
offence meant. But ye maun ken the great ancient families canna be
just served wi' the ordinary saunts, (praise to them!) like Saunt
Anthony, Saunt Cuthbert, and the like, that come and gang at every
sinner's bidding, but they hae a sort of saunts or angels, or what
not, to themsells; and as for the White Maiden of Avenel, she is kend
ower the haill country. And she is aye seen to yammer and wail before
ony o' that family dies, as was weel kend by twenty folk before the
death of Walter Avenel, haly be his cast!"

"If she can do nae mair than that," said Elspeth, somewhat scornfully,
"they needna make mony vows to her, I trow. Can she make nae better
fend for them than that, and has naething better to do than wait on
them?"

"Mony braw services can the White Maiden do for them to the boot of
that, and has dune in the auld histories," said Tibb, "but I mind o'
naething in my day, except it was her that the bairn saw in the bog."

"Aweel, aweel, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, rising and lighting the
iron lamp, "these are great privileges of your grand folk. But our
Lady and Saunt Paul are good eneugh saunts for me, and I'se warrant
them never leave me in a bog that they can help me out o', seeing I
send four waxen candles to their chapels every Candlemas; and if they
are not seen to weep at my death, I'se warrant them smile at my joyful
rising again, whilk Heaven send to all of us, Amen."

"Amen," answered Tibb, devoutly; "and now it's time I should hap up
the wee bit gathering turf, as the fire is ower low."

Busily she set herself to perform this duty. The relict of Simon
Glendinning did but pause a moment to cast a heedful and cautious
glance all around the hall, to see that nothing was out of its proper
place; then, wishing Tibb good-night, she retired to repose.

"The deil's in the carline," said Tibb to herself, "because she was
the wife of a cock-laird, she thinks herself grander, I trow, than the
bower-woman of a lady of that ilk!" Having given vent to her
suppressed spleen in this little ejaculation, Tibb also betook herself
to slumber.




Chapter the Fifth.


  A priest, ye cry, a priest!--lame shepherds they,
  How shall they gather in the straggling flock?
  Dumb dogs which bark not--how shall they compel
  The loitering vagrants to the Master's fold?
  Fitter to bask before the blazing fire,
  And snuff the mess neat-handed Phillis dresses,
  Than on the snow-wreath battle with the wolf.
                           REFORMATION.


The health of the Lady of Avenel had been gradually decaying ever
since her disaster. It seemed as if the few years which followed her
husband's death had done on her the work of half a century. She lost
the fresh elasticity of form, the colour and the mien of health, and
became wasted, wan, and feeble. She appeared to have no formed
complaint; yet it was evident to those who looked on her, that her
strength waned daily. Her lips at length became blenched and her eye
dim; yet she spoke not of any desire to see a priest, until Elspeth
Glendinning in her zeal could not refrain from touching upon a point
which she deemed essential to salvation. Alice of Avenel received her
hint kindly, and thanked her for it.

"If any good priest would take the trouble of such a journey," she
said, "he should be welcome; for the prayers and lessons of the good
must be at all times advantageous."

This quiet acquiescence was not quite what Elspeth Glendinning wished
or expected. She made up, however, by her own enthusiasm, for the
lady's want of eagerness to avail herself of ghostly counsel, and
Martin was despatched with such haste as Shagram would make, to pray
one of the religious men of Saint Mary's to come up to administer the
last consolations to the widow of Walter Avenel.

When the Sacristan had announced to the Lord Abbot, that the Lady of
the umquhile Walter de Avenel was in very weak health in the Tower of
Glendearg, and desired the assistance of a father confessor, the
lordly monk paused on the request.

"We do remember Walter de Avenel," he said; "a good knight and a
valiant: he was dispossessed of his lands, and slain by the
Southron--May not the lady come hither to the sacrament of confession?
the road is distant and painful to travel."

"The lady is unwell, holy father," answered the Sacristan, "and unable
to bear the journey."

"True--ay,--yes--then must one of our brethren go to her--Knowest
thou if she hath aught of a jointure from this Walter de Avenel?"

"Very little, holy father," said the Sacristan; "she hath resided at
Glendearg since her husband's death, well-nigh on the charity of a
poor widow, called Elspeth Glendinning."

"Why, thou knowest all the widows in the country-side!" said the
Abbot. "Ho! ho! ho!" and he shook his portly sides at his own jest.

"Ho! ho! ho!" echoed the Sacristan, in the tone and tune in which an
inferior applauds the jest of his superior.--Then added, with a
hypocritical shuffle, and a sly twinkle of his eye, "It is our duty,
most holy father, to comfort the widow--He! he! he!"

This last laugh was more moderate, until the Abbot should put his
sanction on the jest.

"Ho! ho!" said the Abbot; "then, to leave jesting, Father Philip, take
thou thy riding gear, and go to confess this Dame Avenel."

"But," said the Sacristan----

"Give me no _Buts;_ neither But nor If pass between monk and
Abbot, Father Philip; the bands of discipline must not be
relaxed--heresy gathers force like a snow-ball--the multitude expect
confessions and preachings from the Benedictine, as they would from so
many beggarly friars--and we may not desert the vineyard, though the
toil be grievous unto us."

"And with so little advantage to the holy monastery," said the
Sacristan.

"True, Father Philip; but wot you not that what preventeth harm doth
good? This Julian de Avenel lives a light and evil life, and should we
neglect the widow of his brother, he might foray our lands, and we
never able to show who hurt us--moreover it is our duty to an ancient
family, who, in their day, have been benefactors to the Abbey. Away
with thee instantly, brother; ride night and day, an it be necessary,
and let men see how diligent Abbot Boniface and his faithful children
are in the execution of their spiritual duty--toil not deterring them,
for the glen is five miles in length--fear not withholding them, for
it is said to be haunted of spectres--nothing moving them from pursuit
of their spiritual calling; to the confusion of calumnious heretics,
and the comfort and edification of all true and faithful sons of the
Catholic Church. I wonder what our brother Eustace will say to this?"

Breathless with his own picture of the dangers and toil which he was
to encounter, and the fame which he was to acquire, (both by proxy,)
the Abbot moved slowly to finish his luncheon in the refectory, and
the Sacristan, with no very good will, accompanied old Martin in his
return to Glendearg; the greatest impediment in the journey being the
trouble of restraining his pampered mule, that she might tread in
something like an equal pace with poor jaded Shagram.

After remaining an hour in private with his penitent, the monk
returned moody and full of thought. Dame Elspeth, who had placed for
the honoured guest some refreshment in the hall, was struck with the
embarrassment which appeared in his countenance. Elspeth watched him
with great anxiety. She observed there was that on his brow which
rather resembled a person come from hearing the confession of some
enormous crime, than the look of a confessor who resigns a reconciled
penitent, not to earth, but to heaven. After long hesitating, she
could not at length refrain from hazarding a question. She was sure
she said, the leddy had made an easy shrift.  Five years had they
resided together, and she could safely say, no woman lived better.

"Woman," said the Sacristan, sternly, "thou speakest thou knowest not
what--What avails clearing the outside of the platter, if the inside
be foul with heresy?"

"Our dishes and trenchers are not so clean as they could be wished,
holy father," said Elspeth, but half understanding what he said, and
beginning with her apron to wipe the dust from the plates, of which
she supposed him to complain.

"Forbear, Dame Elspeth" said the monk; "your plates are as clean as
wooden trenchers and pewter flagons can well be; the foulness of which
I speak is of that pestilential heresy which is daily becoming
ingrained in this our Holy Church of Scotland, and as a canker-worm in
the rose-garland of the Spouse."

"Holy Mother of Heaven!" said Dame Elspeth, crossing herself, "have
I kept house with a heretic?"

"No, Elspeth, no," replied the monk; "it were too strong a speech for
me to make of this unhappy lady, but I would I could say she is free
from heretical opinions. Alas! they fly about like the pestilence by
noon-day, and infect even the first and fairest of the flock! For it
is easy to see of this dame, that she hath been high in judgment as in
rank."

"And she can write and read, I had almost said, as weel as your
reverence" said Elspeth.

"Whom doth she write to, and what doth she read?" said the monk,
eagerly.

"Nay," replied Elspeth, "I cannot say I ever saw her write at all, but
her maiden that was--she now serves the family--says she can write--And
for reading, she has often read to us good things out of a thick black
volume with silver clasps."

"Let me see it," said the monk, hastily, "on your allegiance as a true
vassal--on your faith as a Catholic Christian--instantly--instantly
let me see it."

The good woman hesitated, alarmed at the tone in which the confessor
took up her information; and being moreover of opinion, that what so
good a woman as the Lady of Avenel studied so devoutly, could not be
of a tendency actually evil. But borne down by the clamour,
exclamations, and something like threats used by Father Philip, she at
length brought him the fatal volume. It was easy to do this without
suspicion on the part of the owner, as she lay on her bed exhausted
with the fatigue of a long conference with her confessor, and as the
small _round_, or turret closet, in which was the book and her
other trifling property, was accessible by another door. Of all her
effects the book was the last she would have thought of securing, for
of what use or interest could it be in a family who neither read
themselves, nor were in the habit of seeing any who did? so that Dame
Elspeth had no difficulty in possessing herself of the volume,
although her heart all the while accused her of an ungenerous and an
inhospitable part towards her friend and inmate. The double power of a
landlord and a feudal superior was before her eyes; and to say truth,
the boldness, with which she might otherwise have resisted this double
authority, was, I grieve to say it, much qualified by the curiosity
she entertained, as a daughter of Eve, to have some explanation
respecting the mysterious volume which the lady cherished with so much
care, yet whose contents she imparted with such caution. For never had
Alice of Avenel read them any passage from the book in question until
the iron door of the tower was locked, and all possibility of
intrusion prevented. Even then she had shown, by the selection of
particular passages, that she was more anxious to impress on their
minds the principles which the volume contained, than to introduce
them to it as a new rule of faith.

When Elspeth, half curious, half remorseful, had placed the book in the
monk's hands, he exclaimed, after turning over the leaves, "Now, by mine
order, it is as I suspected!--My mule, my mule!--I will abide no longer
here--well hast thou done, dame, in placing in my hands this perilous
volume."

"Is it then witchcraft or devil's work?" said Dame Elspeth, in great
agitation.

"Nay, God forbid!" said the monk, signing himself with the cross, "it
is the Holy Scripture. But it is rendered into the vulgar tongue, and
therefore, by the order of the Holy Catholic Church, unfit to be in
the hands of any lay person."

"And yet is the Holy Scripture communicated for our common salvation,"
said Elspeth. "Good Father, you must instruct mine ignorance better;
but lack of wit cannot be a deadly sin, and truly, to my poor
thinking, I should be glad to read the Holy Scripture."

"I dare say thou wouldst," said the monk; "and even thus did our
mother Eve seek to have knowledge of good and evil, and thus Sin came
into the world, and Death by Sin."

"I am sure, and it is true," said Elspeth. "Oh, if she had dealt by the
counsel of Saint Peter and Saint Paul!"

"If she had reverenced the command of Heaven," said the monk, "which,
as it gave her birth, life, and happiness, fixed upon the grant such
conditions as best corresponded with its holy pleasure. I tell thee,
Elspeth, _the Word slayeth_--that is, the text alone, read with
unskilled eye and unhallowed lips, is like those strong medicines
which sick men take by the advice of the learned. Such patients
recover and thrive; while those dealing in them at their own hand,
shall perish by their own deed."

"Nae doubt, nae doubt," said the poor woman, "your reverence knows
best."

"Not I," said Father Philip, in a tone as deferential as he thought
could possibly become the Sacristan of Saint Mary's,--"Not I, but the
Holy Father of Christendom, and our own holy father, the Lord Abbot,
know best. I, the poor Sacristan of Saint Mary's, can but repeat what
I hear from others my superiors. Yet of this, good woman, be
assured,--the Word, the mere Word, slayetlh. But the church hath her
ministers to gloze and to expound the same unto her faithful
congregation; and this I say, not so much, my beloved brethren--I mean
my beloved sister," (for the Sacristan had got into the end of one of
his old sermons,)--"This I speak not so much of the rectors, curates,
and secular clergy, so called because they live after the fashion of
the _seculum_ or age, unbound by those ties which sequestrate us
from the world; neither do I speak this of the mendicant friars,
whether black or gray, whether crossed or uncrossed; but of the monks,
and especially of the monks Benedictine, reformed on the rule of Saint
Bernard of Clairvaux, thence called Cistercian, of which monks,
Christian brethren--sister, I would say--great is the happiness and
glory of the country in possessing the holy ministers of Saint Mary's,
whereof I, though an unworthy brother, may say it hath produced more
saints, more bishops, more popes--may our patrons make us
thankful!--than any holy foundation in Scotland. Wherefore--But I see
Martin hath my mule in readiness, and I will but salute you with the
kiss of sisterhood, which maketh not ashamed, and so betake me to my
toilsome return, for the glen is of bad reputation for the evil
spirits which haunt it.  Moreover, I may arrive too late at the
bridge, whereby I may be obliged to take to the river, which I
observed to be somewhat waxen."

Accordingly, he took his leave of Dame Elspeth, who was confounded by
the rapidity of his utterance, and the doctrine he gave forth, and by
no means easy on the subject of the book, which her conscience told
her she should not have communicated to any one, without the knowledge
of its owner.

Notwithstanding the haste which the monk as well as the mule made to
return to better quarters than they had left at the head of Glendearg;
notwithstanding the eager desire Father Philip had to be the very
first who should acquaint the Abbot that a copy of the book they most
dreaded had been found within the Halidome, or patrimony of the Abbey;
notwithstanding, moreover, certain feelings which induced him to hurry
as fast as possible through the gloomy and evil-reputed glen, still
the difficulties of the road, and the rider's want of habitude of
quick motion, were such, that twilight came upon him ere he had nearly
cleared the narrow valley.  It was indeed a gloomy ride. The two sides
of the vale were so near, that at every double of the river the
shadows from the western sky fell upon, and totally obscured, the
eastern bank; the thickets of copsewood seemed to wave with a
portentous agitation of boughs and leaves, and the very crags and
scaurs seemed higher and grimmer than they had appeared to the monk
while he was travelling in daylight, and in company. Father Philip was
heartily rejoiced, when, emerging from the narrow glen, he gained the
open valley of the Tweed, which held on its majestic course from
current to pool, and from pool stretched away to other currents, with
a dignity peculiar to itself amongst the Scottish rivers; for whatever
may have been the drought of the season, the Tweed usually fills up
the space between its banks, seldom leaving those extensive sheets of
shingle which deform the margins of many of the celebrated Scottish
streams.

The monk, insensible to beauties which the age had not regarded as
deserving of notice, was, nevertheless, like a prudent general,
pleased to find himself out of the narrow glen in which the enemy
might have stolen upon him unperceived. He drew up his bridle, reduced
his mule to her natural and luxurious amble, instead of the agitating
and broken trot at which, to his no small inconvenience, she had
hitherto proceeded, and, wiping his brow, gazed forth at leisure on
the broad moon, which, now mingling with the lights of evening, was
rising over field and forest, village and fortalice, and, above all,
over the stately Monastery, seen far and dim amid the vellow light.

The worst part of the magnificent view, in the monk's apprehension,
was, that the Monastery stood on the opposite side of the river, and
that of the many fine bridges which have since been built across that
classical stream, not one then existed. There was, however, in
recompense, a bridge then standing which has since disappeared,
although its ruins may still be traced by the curious.

It was of a very peculiar form. Two strong abutments were built on
either side of the river, at a part where the stream was peculiarly
contracted.  Upon a rock in the centre of the current was built a
solid piece of masonry, constructed like the pier of a bridge, and
presenting, like a pier, an angle to the current of the stream. The
masonry continued solid until the pier rose to a level with the two
abutments upon either side, and from thence the building rose in the
form of a tower. The lower story of this tower consisted only of an
archway or passage through the building, over either entrance to which
hung a drawbridge with counterpoises, either of which, when dropped,
connected the archway with the opposite abutment, where the farther
end of the drawbridge rested. When both bridges were thus lowered, the
passage over the river was complete.

The bridge-keeper, who was the dependant of a neighbouring baron,
resided with his family in the second and third stories of the tower,
which, when both drawbridges were raised, formed an insulated
fortalice in the midst of the river. He was entitled to a small toll
or custom for the passage, concerning the amount of which disputes
sometimes arose between him and the passengers. It is needless to say,
that the bridge-ward had usually the better in these questions, since
he could at pleasure detain the traveller on the opposite side; or,
suffering him to pass half way, might keep him prisoner in his tower
till they were agreed on the rate of pontage.

[Footnote: A bridge of the very peculiar construction described in the
text, actually existed at a small hamlet about a mile and a half above
Melrose, called from the circumstance Bridge-end. It is thus noticed
in Gordon's _Iter Septentrionale_:--

"In another journey through the south parts of Scotland, about a mile
and a half from Melrose, in the shire of Teviotdale, I saw the remains
of a curious bridge over the river Tweed, consisting of three
octangular pillars, or rather towers, standing within the water,
without any arches to join them. The middle one, which is the most
entire, has a door towards the north, and I suppose another opposite
one toward the south, which I could not see without crossing the
water. In the middle of this tower is a projection or cornice
surrounding it: the whole is hollow from the door upwards, and now
open at the top, near which is a small window. I was informed that not
long agro a countryman and his family lived in this tower--and got his
livelihood by laying out planks from pillar to pillar, and conveying
passengers over the river. Whether this be ancient or modern, I know
not; but as it is singular in its kind I have thought fit to exhibit
it."

The vestiges of this uncommon species of bridge still exist, and the
author has often seen the foundations of the columns when drifting
down the Tweed at night for the purpose of killing salmon by
torch-light. Mr. John Mercer of Bridge-end recollects, that about
fifty years ago the pillars were visible above water; and the late Mr.
David Kyle, of the George Inn, Melrose, told the author that he saw a
stone taken from the river bearing this inscription:--

"I, Sir John Pringle of Palmer stede,
Give an hundred markis of gowd sae reid,
To help to bigg my brigg ower Tweed."

Pringle of Galashiels, afterwards of Whytbank, was the Baron to whom
the bridge belonged.]

But it was most frequently with the Monks of Saint Mary's that the
warder had to dispute his perquisites. These holy men insisted for,
and at length obtained, a right of gratuitous passage to themselves,
greatly to the discontent of the bridge-keeper. But when they demanded
the same immunity for the numerous pilgrims who visited the shrine,
the bridge-keeper waxed restive, and was supported by his lord in his
resistance. The controversy grew animated on both sides; the Abbot
menaced excommunication, and the keeper of the bridge, though unable
to retaliate in kind, yet made each individual monk who had to cross
and recross the river, endure a sort of purgatory, ere he would
accommodate them with a passage. This was a great inconvenience, and
would have proved a more serious one, but that the river was fordable
for man and horse in ordinary weather.

It was a fine moonlight night, as we have already said, when Father
Philip approached this bridge, the singular construction of which
gives a curious idea of the insecurity of the times. The river was not
in flood, but it was above its ordinary level--_a heavy water_,
as it is called in that country, through which the monk had no
particular inclination to ride, if he could manage the matter better.

"Peter, my good friend," cried the Sacristan, raising his voice; "my
very excellent friend, Peter, be so kind as to lower the drawbridge.
Peter, I say, dost thou not hear?--it is thy gossip, Father Philip,
who calls thee."

Peter heard him perfectly well, and saw him into the bargain; but as
he had considered the Sacristan as peculiarly his enemy in his dispute
with the convent, he went quietly to bed, after reconnoitring the monk
through his loop-hole, observing to his wife, that "riding the water
in a moonlight night would do the Sacristan no harm, and would teach
him the value of a brig the neist time, on whilk a man might pass high
and dry, winter and summer, flood and ebb."

After exhausting his voice in entreaties and threats, which were
equally unattended to by Peter of the Brig, as he was called, Father
Philip at length moved down the river to take the ordinary ford at the
head of the next stream. Cursing the rustic obstinacy of Peter, he
began, nevertheless, to persuade himself that the passage of the river
by the ford was not only safe, but pleasant.  The banks and scattered
trees were so beautifully reflected from the bosom of the dark stream,
the whole cool and delicious picture formed so pleasing a contrast to
his late agitation, to the warmth occasioned by his vain endeavours to
move the relentless porter of the bridge, that the result was rather
agreeable than otherwise.

As Father Philip came close to the water's edge, at the spot where he
was to enter it, there sat a female under a large broken scathed
oak-tree, or rather under the remains of such a tree, weeping,
wringing her hands, and looking earnestly on the current of the river.
The monk was struck with astonishment to see a female there at that
time of night. But he was, in all honest service,--and if a step
farther, I put it upon his own conscience,--a devoted squire of dames.
After observing the maiden for a moment, although she seemed to take
no notice of his presence, he was moved by her distress, and willing
to offer his assistance. "Damsel," said he, "thou seemest in no
ordinary distress; peradventure, like myself, thou hast been refused
passage at the bridge by the churlish keeper, and thy crossing may
concern thee either for performance of a vow, or some other weighty
charge."

The maiden uttered some inarticulate sounds, looked at the river, and
then in the face of the Sacristan. It struck Father Philip at that
instant, that a Highland chief of distinction had been for some time
expected to pay his vows at the shrine of Saint Mary's; and that
possibly this fair maiden might be one of his family, travelling alone
for accomplishment of a vow, or left behind by some accident, to whom,
therefore, it would be but right and prudent to use every civility in
his power, especially as she seemed unacquainted with the Lowland
tongue. Such at least was the only motive the Sacristan was ever known
to assign for his courtesy; if there was any other, I once more refer
it to his own conscience.

To express himself by signs, the common language of all nations, the
cautious Sacristan first pointed to the river, then to his mule's
crupper, and then made, as gracefully as he could, a sign to induce
the fair solitary to mount behind him. She seemed to understand his
meaning, for she rose up as if to accept his offer; and while the good
monk, who, as we have hinted, was no great cavalier, laboured, with
the pressure of the right leg and the use of the left rein, to place
his mule with her side to the bank in such a position that the lady
might mount with ease, she rose from the ground with rather portentous
activity, and at one bound sate behind the monk upon the animal, much
the firmer rider of the two. The mule by no means seemed to approve of
this double burden; she bounded, bolted, and would soon have thrown
Father Philip over her head, had not the maiden with a firm hand
detained him in the saddle.

At last the restive brute changed her humour; and, from refusing to
budge off the spot, suddenly stretched her nose homeward, and dashed
into the ford as fast as she could scamper. A new terror now invaded
the monk's mind--the ford seemed unusually deep, the water eddied off
in strong ripple from the counter of the mule, and began to rise upon
her side. Philip lost his presence of mind,--which was at no time his
most ready attribute, the mule yielded to the weight of the current,
and as the rider was not attentive to keep her head turned up the
river, she drifted downward, lost the ford and her footing at once,
and began to swim with her head down the stream.  And what was
sufficiently strange, at the same moment, notwithstanding the extreme
peril, the damsel began to sing, thereby increasing, if anything could
increase, the bodily fear of the worthy Sacristan.

               I.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  Both current and ripple are dancing in light.
  We have roused the night raven, I heard him croak,
  As we plashed along beneath the oak
  That flings its broad branches so far and so wide,
  Their shadows are dancing in midst of the tide.
  "Who wakens my nestlings," the raven he said,
  "My beak shall ere morn in his blood be red.
  For a blue swoln corpse is a dainty meal.
  And I'll have my share with the pike and the eel."

               II.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  There's a golden gleam on the distant height;
  There's a silver shower on the alders dank.
  And the drooping willows that wave on the bank.
  I see the abbey, both turret and tower,
  It is all astir for the vesper hour;
  The monks for the chapel are leaving each cell.
  But Where's Father Philip, should toll the bell?

               III.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  Downward we drift through shadow and light,
  Under yon rock the eddies sleep,
  Calm and silent, dark and deep.
  The Kelpy has risen from the fathomless pool.
  He has lighted his candle of death and of dool.
  Look, Father, look, and you'll laugh to see
  How he gapes and glares with his eyes on thee.

               IV.

  Good luck to your fishing, whom watch ye to-night?
  A man of mean, or a man of might?
  Is it layman or priest that must float in your cove,
  Or lover who crosses to visit his love?
  Hark! heard ye the Kelpy reply, as we pass'd,--
  "God's blessing on the warder, he lock'd the bridge fast!
  All that come to my cove are sunk,
  Priest or layman, lover or monk."


How long the damsel might have continued to sing, or where the
terrified monk's journey might have ended, is uncertain. As she sung
the last stanza, they arrived at, or rather in, a broad tranquil sheet
of water, caused by a strong wear or damhead, running across the
river, which dashed in a broad cataract over the barrier. The mule,
whether from choice, or influenced by the suction of the current, made
towards the cut intended to supply the convent mills, and entered it
half swimming half wading, and pitching the unlucky monk to and fro in
the saddle at a fearful rate.

As his person flew hither and thither, his garment became loose, and
in an effort to retain it, his hand lighted on the volume of the Lady
of Avenel which was in his bosom. No sooner had he grasped it, than
his companion pitched him out of the saddle into the stream, where,
still keeping her hand on his collar, she gave him two or three good
souses in the watery fluid, so as to ensure that every other part of
him had its share of wetting, and then quitted her hold when he was so
near the side that by a slight effort (of a great one he was
incapable) he might scramble on shore. This accordingly he
accomplished, and turning his eyes to see what had become of his
extraordinary companion, she was nowhere to be seen; but still he
heard, as if from the surface of the river, and mixing with the noise
of the water breaking over the damhead, a fragment of her wild song,
which seemed to run thus:--

  Landed--landed! the black book hath won.
  Else had you seen Berwick with morning sun!
  Sain ye, and save ye, and blithe mot ye be,
  For seldom they land that go swimming with me.

The ecstasy of the monk's terror could be endured no longer; his head
grew dizzy, and, after staggering a few steps onward and running himself
against a wall, he sunk down in a state of insensibility.




Chapter the Sixth.


  Now let us sit in conclave. That these weeds
  Be rooted from the vineyard of the church.
  That these foul tares be severed from the wheat,
  We are, I trust, agreed.--Yet how to do this,
  Nor hurt the wholesome crop and tender vine-plants,
  Craves good advisement.

THE REFORMATION.

The vesper service in the Monastery Church of Saint Mary's was now
over. The Abbot had disrobed himself of his magnificent vestures of
ceremony, and resumed his ordinary habit, which was a black gown, worn
over a white cassock, with a narrow scapulary; a decent and venerable
dress, which was calculated to set off to advantage the portly mien of
Abbot Boniface.

In quiet times no one could have filled the state of a mitred Abbot,
for such was his dignity, more respectably than this worthy prelate.
He had, no doubt, many of those habits of self-indulgence which men
are apt to acquire who live for themselves alone. He was vain,
moreover; and when boldly confronted, had sometimes shown symptoms of
timidity, not very consistent with the high claims which he preferred
as an eminent member of the church, or with the punctual deference
which he exacted from his religious brethren, and all who were placed
under his command. But he was hospitable, charitable, and by no means
of himself disposed to proceed with severity against any one. In
short, he would in other times have slumbered out his term of
preferment with as much credit as any other "purple Abbot," who lived
easily, but at the same time decorously--slept soundly, and did not
disquiet himself with dreams.

But the wide alarm spread through the whole Church of Rome by the
progress of the reformed doctrines, sorely disturbed the repose of
Abbot Boniface, and opened to him a wide field of duties and cares
which he had never so much as dreamed of. There were opinions to be
combated and refuted--practices to be inquired into--heretics to be
detected and punished--the fallen off to be reclaimed--the wavering to
be confirmed--scandal to be removed from the clergy, and the vigour of
discipline to be re-established.  Post upon post arrived at the
Monastery of Saint Mary's--horses reeking, and riders exhausted--this
from the Privy Council, that from the Primate of Scotland, and this
other again from the Queen Mother, exhorting, approving, condemning,
requesting advice upon this subject, and requiring information upon
that.

These missives Abbot Boniface received with an important air of
helplessness, or a helpless air of importance,--whichever the reader
may please to term it, evincing at once gratified vanity, and profound
trouble of mind.  The sharp-witted Primate of Saint Andrews had
foreseen the deficiencies of the Abbot of St. Mary's, and endeavoured
to provide for them by getting admitted into his Monastery as
Sub-Prior a brother Cistercian, a man of parts and knowledge, devoted
to the service of the Catholic Church, and very capable not only to
advise the Abbot on occasions of difficulty, but to make him sensible
of his duty in case he should, from good-nature or timidity, be
disposed to shrink from it.

Father Eustace played the same part in the Monastery as the old
general who, in foreign armies, is placed at the elbow of the Prince
of the Blood, who nominally commands in chief, on condition of
attempting nothing without the advice of his dry-nurse; and he shared
the fate of all such dry-nurses, being heartily disliked as well as
feared by his principal. Still, however, the Primate's intention was
fully answered. Father Eustace became the constant theme and often the
bugbear of the worthy Abbot, who hardly dared to turn himself in his
bed without, considering what Father Eustace would think of it. In
every case of difficulty, Father Eustace was summoned, and his opinion
asked; and no sooner was the embarrassment removed, than the Abbot's
next thought was how to get rid of his adviser. In every letter which
he wrote to those in power, he recommended Father Eustace to some high
church preferment, a bishopric or an abbey; and as they dropped one
after another, and were otherwise conferred, he began to think, as he
confessed to the Sacristan in the bitterness of his spirit, that the
Monastery of St.  Mary's had got a life-rent lease of their Sub-Prior.

Yet more indignant he would have been, had he suspected that Father
Eustace's ambition was fixed upon his own mitre, which, from some
attacks of an apoplectic nature, deemed by the Abbot's friends to be
more serious than by himself, it was supposed might be shortly vacant.
But the confidence which, like other dignitaries, he reposed in his
own health, prevented Abbot Boniface from imagining that it held any
concatenation, with the motions of Father Eustace.

The necessity under which he found himself of consulting with his
grand adviser, in cases of real difficulty, rendered the worthy Abbot
particularly desirous of doing without him in all ordinary cases of
administration, though not without considering what Father Eustace
would have said of the matter. He scorned, therefore, to give a hint
to the Sub-Prior of the bold stroke by which he had dispatched Brother
Philip to Glendearg; but when the vespers came without his
reappearance he became a little uneasy, the more as other matters
weighed upon his mind. The feud with the warder or keeper of the
bridge threatened to be attended with bad consequences, as the man's
quarrel was taken up by the martial baron under whom he served; and
pressing letters of an unpleasant tendency had just arrived from the
Primate. Like a gouty man, who catches hold of his crutch while he
curses the infirmity that induces him to use if, the Abbot, however
reluctant, found himself obliged to require Eustace's presence, after
the service was over, in his house, or rather palace, which was
attached to, and made part of, the Monastery.

Abbot Boniface was seated in his high-backed chair, the grotesque
carved back of which terminated in a mitre, before a fire where two or
three large logs were reduced to one red glowing mass of charcoal. At
his elbow, on an oaken stand, stood the remains of a roasted capon, on
which his reverence had made his evening meal, flanked by a goodly
stoup of Bordeaux of excellent flavour. He was gazing indolently on
the fire, partly engaged in meditation on his past and present
fortunes, partly occupied by endeavouring to trace towers and steeples
in the red embers.

"Yes," thought the Abbot to himself, "in that red perspective I could
fancy to myself the peaceful towers of Dundrennan, where I passed my
life ere I was called to pomp and to trouble. A quiet brotherhood we
were, regular in our domestic duties; and when the frailties of
humanity prevailed over us, we confessed, and were absolved by each
other, and the most formidable part of the penance was the jest of the
convent on the culprit. I can almost fancy that I see the cloister
garden, and the pear-trees which I grafted with my own hands. And for
what have I changed all this, but to be overwhelmed with business
which concerns me not, to be called My Lord Abbot, and to be tutored
by Father Eustace? I would these towers were the Abbey of
Aberbrothwick, and Father Eustace the Abbot,--or I would he were in
the fire on any terms, so I were rid of him! The Primate says our Holy
Father, the Pope hath an adviser--I am sure he could not live a week
with such a one as mine. Then there is no learning what Father Eustace
thinks till you confess your own difficulties--No hint will bring
forth his opinion--he is like a miser, who will not unbuckle his purse
to bestow a farthing, until the wretch who needs it has owned his
excess of poverty, and wrung out the boon by importunity. And thus I
am dishonoured in the eyes of my religious brethren, who behold me
treated like a child which hath no sense of its own--I will bear it no
longer!--Brother Bennet,"--(a lay brother answered to his call)--"
tell Father Eustace that I need not his presence."

"I came to say to your reverence, that the holy father is entering
even now from the cloisters."

"Be it so," said the Abbot, "he is welcome,--remove these things--or
rather, place a trencher, the holy father may be a little hungry--yet,
no--remove them, for there is no good fellowship in him--Let the stoup
of wine remain, however, and place another cup."

The lay brother obeyed these contradictory commands in the way he
judged most seemly--he removed the carcass of the half-sacked capon,
and placed two goblets beside the stoup of Bourdeaux. At the same
instant entered Father Eustace.

He was a thin, sharp-faced, slight-made little man, whose keen grey
eyes seemed almost to look through the person to whom he addressed
himself. His body was emaciated not only with the fasts which he
observed with rigid punctuality, but also by the active and unwearied
exercise of his sharp and piercing intellect;--

  A fiery soul, which working out its way,
  Fretted the puny body to decay,
  And o'er-informed the tenement of clay.

He turned with conventual reverence to the Lord Abbot; and as they
stood together, it was scarce possible to see a more complete
difference of form and expression. The good-natured rosy face and
laughing eye of the Abbot, which even his present anxiety could not
greatly ruffle, was a wonderful contrast to the thin pallid cheek and
quick penetrating glance of the monk, in which an eager and keen
spirit glanced through eyes to which it seemed to give supernatural
lustre.

The Abbot opened the conversation by motioning to his monk to take a
stool, and inviting to a cup of wine. The courtesy was declined with
respect, yet not without a remark, that the vesper service was past.

"For the stomach's sake, brother," said the Abbot, colouring a
little--"You know the text."

"It is a dangerous one," answered the monk, "to handle alone, or at
late hours. Out off from human society, the juice of the grape becomes
a perilous companion of solitude, and therefore I ever shun it."

Abbot Boniface had poured himself out a goblet which might hold about
half an English pint; but, either struck with the truth of the
observation, or ashamed to act in direct opposition to it, he suffered
it to remain untasted before him, and immediately changed the subject.

"The Primate hath written to us," said he, "to make strict search
within our bounds after the heretical persons denounced in this list,
who have withdrawn themselves from the justice which their opinions
deserve. It is deemed probable that they will attempt to retire to
England by our Borders, and the Primate requireth me to watch with
vigilance, and what not."

"Assuredly," said the monk, "the magistrate should not bear the sword
in vain--those be they that turn the world upside down--and doubtless
your reverend wisdom will with due diligence second the exertions of
the Right Reverend Father in God, being in the peremptory defence of
the Holy Church."

"Ay, but how is this to be done?" answered the Abbot; "Saint Mary aid
us! The Primate writes to me as if I were a temporal baron--a man
under command, having soldiers under him! He says, send forth--scour
the country--guard the passes--Truly these men do not travel as those
who would give their lives for nothing--the last who went south passed
the dry-march at the Riding-burn with an escort of thirty spears, as
our reverend brother the Abbot of Kelso did write unto us. How are
cowls and scapularies to stop the way?"

"Your bailiff is accounted a good man at arms, holy father," said
Eustace; "your vassals are obliged to rise for the defence of the Holy
Kirk--it is the tenure on which they hold their lands--if they will
not come forth for the Church which gives them bread, let their
possessions be given to others."

"We shall not be wanting," said the Abbot, collecting himself with
importance, "to do whatever may advantage Holy Kirk--thyself shall
hear the charge to our Bailiff and our officials--but here again is
our controversy with the warden of the bridge and the Baron of
Meigallot--Saint Mary!  vexations do so multiply upon the House, and
upon the generation, that a man wots not where to turn to! Thou didst
say, Father Eustace, thou wouldst look into our evidents touching this
free passage for the pilgrims?"

"I have looked into the Chartulary of the House, holy father," said
Eustace, "and therein I find a written and formal grant of all duties
and customs payable at the drawbridge of Brigton, not only by
ecclesiastics of this foundation, but by every pilgrim truly designed
to accomplish his vows at this House, to the Abbot Allford, and the
monks of the House of Saint Mary in Kennaquhair, from that time and
for ever. The deed is dated on Saint Bridget's Even, in the year of
Redemption, 1137, and bears the sign and seal of the granter, Charles
of Meigallot, great-great-grandfather of this baron, and purports to
be granted for the safety of his own soul, and for the weal of the
souls of his father and mother, and of all his predecessors and
successors, being Barons of Meigallot."

"But he alleges," said the Abbot, "that the bridge-wards have been in
possession of these dues, and have rendered them available for more
than fifty years--and the baron threatens violence--meanwhile, the
journey of the pilgrims is interrupted, to the prejudice of their own
souls and the diminution of the revenues of Saint Mary. The Sacristan
advised us to put on a boat; but the warden, whom thou knowest to be a
godless man, has sworn the devil tear him, but that if they put on a
boat on the laird's stream, he will rive her board from board--and
then some say we should compound the claim for a small sum in silver."
Here the Abbot paused a moment for a reply, but receiving none, he
added, "But what thinkest thou, Father Eustace? why art thou silent?"

"Because I am surprised at the question which the Lord Abbot of Saint
Mary's asks at the youngest of his brethren."

"Youngest in time of your abode with us, Brother Eustace," said the
Abbot, "not youngest in years, or I think in experience. Sub-Prior
also of this convent."

"I am astonished," continued Eustace, "that the Abbot of this
venerable house should ask of any one whether he can alienate the
patrimony of our holy and divine patroness, or give up to an
unconscientious, and perhaps, a heretic baron, the rights conferred on
this church by his devout progenitor. Popes and councils alike
prohibit it--the honour of the living, and the weal of departed souls,
alike forbid it--it may not be. To force, if he dare use it, we must
surrender; but never by our consent should we see the goods of the
church plundered, with as little scruple as he would drive off a herd
of English beeves. Rouse yourself, Reverend father, and doubt nothing
but that the good cause shall prevail. Whet the spiritual sword, and
direct it against the wicked who would usurp our holy rights. Whet the
temporal sword, if it be necessary, and stir up the courage and zeal
of your loyal vassals."

The Abbot sighed deeply. "All this," he said, "is soon spoken by him
who hath to act it not; but--" He was interrupted by the entrance of
Bennet rather hastily. "The mule on which the Sacristan had set out in
the morning had returned," he said, "to the convent stable all over
wet, and with the saddle turned round beneath her belly."

"Sancta Maria!" said the Abbot, "our dear brother hath perished by the
way!"

"It may not be," said Eustace, hastily--"let the bell be tolled--cause
the brethren to get torches--alarm the village--hurry down to the
river--I myself will be the foremost."

The real Abbot stood astonished and agape, when at once he beheld his
office filled, and saw all which he ought to have ordered, going
forward at the dictates of the youngest monk in the convent. But ere
the orders of Eustace, which nobody dreamed of disputing, were carried
into execution, the necessity was prevented by the sudden apparition
of the Sacristan, whose supposed danger excited all the alarm.




Chapter the Seventh.


     Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
     Cleanse the foul bosom of the perilous stuff
     That weighs upon the heart.
                                         MACBETH.

What betwixt cold and fright the afflicted Sacristan stood before his
Superior, propped on the friendly arm of the convent miller, drenched
with water, and scarce able to utter a syllable.

After various attempts to speak, the first words he uttered were,

  "Swim we merrily--the moon shines bright."

"Swim we merrily!" retorted the Abbot, indignantly; "a merry night
have ye chosen for swimming, and a becoming salutation to your
Superior!"

"Our brother is bewildered," said Eustace;--"speak, Father Philip, how
is it with you?"

  "Good luck to your fishing,"

continued the Sacristan, making a most dolorous attempt at the tune of
his strange companion.

"Good luck to your fishing!" repeated the Abbot, still more surprised
than displeased; "by my halidome he is drunken with wine, and comes to
our presence with his jolly catches in his throat! If bread and water
can cure this folly--"

"With your pardon, venerable father," said the Sub-Prior, "of water
our brother has had enough; and methinks, the confusion of his eye, is
rather that of terror, than of aught unbecoming his profession. Where
did you find him, Hob Miller?"

"An it please your reverence, I did but go to shut the sluice of the
mill--and as I was going to shut the sluice, I heard something groan
near to me; but judging it was one of Giles Fletcher's hogs--for so
please you he never shuts his gate--I caught up my lever, and was
about--Saint Mary forgive me!--to strike where I heard the sound,
when, as the saints would have it, I heard the second groan just like
that of a living man. So I called up my knaves, and found the Father
Sacristan lying wet and senseless under the wall of our kiln. So soon
as we brought him to himself a bit, he prayed to be brought to your
reverence, but I doubt me his wits have gone a bell-wavering by the
road. It was but now that he spoke in somewhat better form."

"Well!" said Brother Eustace, "thou hast done well, Hob Miller; only
begone now, and remember a second time to pause, ere you strike in the
dark."

"Please your reverence, it shall be a lesson to me," said the miller,
"not to mistake a holy man for a hog again, so long as I live." And,
making a bow, with profound humility, the miller withdrew.

"And now that this churl is gone, Father Philip," said Eustace, "wilt
thou tell our venerable Superior what ails thee? art thou _vino
gravatus,_ man? if so we will have thee to thy cell."

"Water! water! not wine," muttered the exhausted Sacristan.

"Nay," said the monk, "if that be thy complaint, wine may perhaps
cure thee;" and he reached him a cup, which the patient drank off to his
great benefit.

"And now," said the Abbot, "let his garments be changed, or rather let
him be carried to the infirmary; for it will prejudice our health,
should we hear his narrative while he stands there, steaming like a
rising hoar-frost."

"I will hear his adventure," said Eustace, "and report it to your
reverence." And, accordingly, he attended the Sacristan to his cell. In
about half an hour he returned to the Abbot.

"How is it with Father Philip?" said the Abbot; "and through what
came he into such a state?"

"He comes from Glendearg, reverend sir," said Eustace; "and for the
rest, he telleth such a legend, as has not been heard in this
Monastery for many a long day." He then gave the Abbot the outlines of
the Sacristan's adventures in the homeward journey, and added, that
for some time he was inclined to think his brain was infirm, seeing he
had sung, laughed, and wept all in the same breath.

"A wonderful thing it is to us," said the Abbot, "that Satan has been
permitted to put forth his hand thus far on one of our sacred brethren!"

"True," said Father Eustace; "but for every text there is a
paraphrase; and I have my suspicions, that if the drenching of Father
Philip cometh of the Evil one, yet it may not have been altogether
without his own personal fault."

"How!" said the Father Abbot; "I will not believe that thou makest
doubt that Satan, in former days, hath been permitted to afflict
saints and holy men, even as he afflicted the pious Job?"

"God forbid I should make question of it," said the monk, crossing
himself; "yet, where there is an exposition of the Sacristan's tale,
which is less than miraculous, I hold it safe to consider it at least,
if not to abide by it. Now, this Hob the Miller hath a buxom daughter.
Suppose--I say only suppose--that our Sacristan met her at the ford on
her return from her uncle's on the other side, for there she hath this
evening been--suppose, that, in courtesy, and to save her stripping
hose and shoon, the Sacristan brought her across behind him-suppose he
carried his familiarities farther than the maiden was willing to
admit; and we may easily suppose, farther, that this wetting was the
result of it."

"And this legend invented to deceive us!" said the Superior, reddening
with wrath; "but most strictly shall it be sifted and inquired into;
it is not upon us that Father Philip must hope to pass the result of
his own evil practices for doings of Satan. To-morrow cite the wench
to appear before us--we will examine, and we will punish."

"Under your reverence's favour," said Eustace, "that were but poor
policy. As things now stand with us, the heretics catch hold of each
flying report which tends to the scandal of our clergy. We must abate
the evil, not only by strengthening discipline, but also by
suppressing and stifling the voice of scandal. If my conjectures are
true, the miller's daughter will be silent for her own sake; and your
reverence's authority may also impose silence on her father, and on
the Sacristan. If he is again found to afford room for throwing
dishonour on his order, he can be punished with severity, but at the
same time with secrecy. For what say the Decretals! Facinora ostendi
dum punientur, flagitia autem abscondi debent."

A sentence of Latin, as Eustace had before observed, had often much
influence on the Abbot, because he understood it not fluently, and was
ashamed to acknowledge his ignorance. On these terms they parted for
the night.

The next day, Abbot Boniface strictly interrogated Philip on the real
cause of his disaster of the previous night. But the Sacristan stood
firm to his story; nor was he found to vary from any point of it,
although the answers he returned were in some degree incoherent, owing
to his intermingling with them ever and anon snatches of the strange
damsel's song, which had made such deep impression on his imagination,
that he could not prevent himself from imitating it repeatedly in the
course of his examination. The Abbot had compassion with the
Sacristan's involuntary frailty, to which something supernatural
seemed annexed, and finally became of opinion, that Father Eustace's
more natural explanation was rather plausible than just. And, indeed,
although we have recorded the adventure as we find it written down, we
cannot forbear to add that there was a schism on the subject in the
convent, and that several of the brethren pretended to have good
reason for thinking that the miller's black-eyed daughter was at the
bottom of the affair after all. Whichever way it might be interpreted,
all agreed that it had too ludicrous a sound to be permitted to get
abroad, and therefore the Sacristan was charged, on his vow of
obedience, to say no more of his ducking; an injunction which, having
once eased his mind by telling his story, it may be well conjectured
that he joyfully obeyed.

The attention of Father Eustace was much less forcibly arrested by the
marvellous tale of the Sacristan's danger, and his escape, than by the
mention of the volume which he had brought with him from the Tower of
Glendearg. A copy of the Scriptures, translated into the vulgar
tongue, had found its way even into the proper territory of the
church, and had been discovered in one of the most hidden and
sequestered recesses of the Halidome of Saint Mary's.

He anxiously requested to see the volume. In this the Sacristan was
unable to gratify him, for he had lost it, as far as he recollected,
when the supernatural being, as he conceived her to be, took her
departure from him. Father Eustace went down to the spot in person,
and searched all around it, in hopes of recovering the volume in
question; but his labour was in vain. He returned to the Abbot, and
reported that it must have fallen into the river or the mill-stream;
"for I will hardly believe," he said, "that Father Philip's musical
friend would fly off with a copy of the Holy Scriptures."

"Being," said the Abbot, "as it is, an heretical translation, it may
be thought that Satan may have power over it."

"Ay!" said Father Eustace, "it is indeed his chiefest magazine of
artillery, when he inspireth presumptuous and daring men to set forth
their own opinions and expositions of Holy Writ. But though thus
abused, the Scriptures are the source of our salvation, and are no
more to be reckoned unholy, because of these rash men's proceedings,
than a powerful medicine is to be contemned, or held poisonous,
because bold and evil leeches have employed it to the prejudice of
their patients. With the permission of your reverence, I would that
this matter were looked into more closely. I will myself visit the
Tower of Glendearg ere I am many hours older, and we shall see if any
spectre or white woman of the wild will venture to interrupt my
journey or return. Have I your reverend permission and your blessing?"
he added, but in a tone that appeared to set no great store by either.

"Thou hast both, my brother," said the Abbot; but no sooner had
Eustace left the apartment, than Boniface could not help breaking on
the willing ear of the Sacristan his sincere wish, that any spirit,
black, white, or gray, would read the adviser such a lesson, as to
cure him of his presumption in esteeming himself wiser than the whole
community.

"I wish him no worse lesson," said the Sacristan, "than to go swimming
merrily down the river with a ghost behind, and Kelpies, night-crows,
and mud-eels, all waiting to have a snatch at him.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright!
  Good luck to your fishing, whom watch you to-night?"

"Brother Philip," said the Abbot, "we exhort thee to say thy prayers,
compose thyself, and banish that foolish chant from thy mind;--it is
but a deception of the devil's."

"I will essay, reverend Father," said the Sacristan, "but the tune
hangs by my memory like a bur in a beggar's rags; it mingles with the
psalter--the very bells of the convent seem to repeat the words, and
jingle to the tune; and were you to put me to death at this very
moment, it is my belief I should die singing it--'Now swim we
merrily'--it is as it were a spell upon me."

He then again began to warble

  "Good luck to your fishing."

And checking himself in the strain with difficulty, he exclaimed, "It
is too certain--I am but a lost priest! Swim we merrily--I shall sing
it at the very mass--Wo is me! I shall sing all the remainder of my
life, and yet never be able to change the tune!"

The honest Abbot replied, "he knew many a good fellow in the same
condition;" and concluded the remark with "ho! ho! ho!" for his
reverence, as the reader may partly have observed, was one of those
dull folks who love a quiet joke.

The Sacristan, well acquainted with his Superior's humour, endeavoured
to join in the laugh, but his unfortunate canticle came again across
his imagination, and interrupted the hilarity of his customary echo.

"By the rood, Brother Philip," said the Abbot, much moved, "you become
altogether intolerable! and I am convinced that such a spell could not
subsist over a person of religion, and in a religious house, unless he
were under mortal sin. Wherefore, say the seven penitentiary
psalms--make diligent use of thy scourge and hair-cloth--refrain for
three days from all food, save bread and water--I myself will shrive
thee, and we will see if this singing devil may be driven out of thee;
at least I think Father Eustace himself could devise no better
exorcism."

The Sacristan sighed deeply, but knew remonstrance was vain. He
retired therefore to his cell, to try how far psalmody might be able
to drive off the sounds of the syren tune which haunted his memory.

Meanwhile, Father Eustace proceeded to the drawbridge, in his way to
the lonely valley of Glendearg. In a brief conversation with the
churlish warder, he had the address to render him more tractable in
the controversy betwixt him and the convent. He reminded him that his
father had been a vassal under the community; that his brother was
childless; and that their possession would revert to the church on his
death, and might be either granted to himself the warder, or to some
greater favourite of the Abbot, as matters chanced to stand betwixt
them at the time. The Sub-Prior suggested to him also, the necessary
connexion of interests betwixt the Monastery  and the office which
this man enjoyed. He listened with temper to his rude and churlish
answers; and by keeping his own interest firm pitched in his view, he
had the satisfaction to find that Peter gradually softened his tone,
and consented to let every pilgrim who travelled upon foot pass free
of exaction until Pentocost next; they who travelled on horseback or
otherwise, contenting to pay the ordinary custom. Having thus
accommodated a matter in which the weal of the convent was so deeply
interested, Father Eustace proceeded on his journey.




Chapter the Eighth.


  Nay, dally not with time, the wise man's treasure,
  Though fools are lavish on't--the fatal Fisher
  Hooks souls, while we waste moments.
                                      OLD PLAY.

A November mist overspread the little valley, up which slowly but
steadily rode the Monk Eustace. He was not insensible to the feeling
of melancholy inspired by the scene and by the season. The stream
seemed to murmur with a deep and oppressed note, as if bewailing the
departure of autumn. Among the scattered copses which here and there
fringed its banks, the oak-trees only retained that pallid green that
precedes their russet hue. The leaves of the willows were most of them
stripped from the branches, lay rustling at each breath, and disturbed
by every step of the mule; while the foliage of other trees, totally
withered, kept still precarious possession of the boughs, waiting the
first wind to scatter them.

The monk dropped into the natural train of pensive thought which these
autumnal emblems of mortal hopes are peculiarly calculated to inspire.
"There," he said, looking at the leaves which lay strewed around, "lie
the hopes of early youth, first formed that they may soonest wither,
and loveliest in spring to become most contemptible in winter; but
you, ye lingerers," he added, looking to a knot of beeches which still
bore their withered leaves, "you are the proud plans of adventurous
manhood, formed later, and still clinging to the mind of age, although
it acknowledges their inanity!  None lasts--none endures, save the
foliage of the hardy oak, which only begins to show itself when that
of the rest of the forest has enjoyed half its existence. A pale and
decayed hue is all it possesses, but still it retains that symptom of
vitality to the last.--So be it with Father Eustace! The fairy hopes
of my youth I have trodden under foot like those neglected
rustlers--to the prouder dreams of my manhood I look back as to lofty
chimeras, of which the pith and essence have long since faded; but my
religious vows, the faithful profession which I have made in my
maturer age, shall retain life while aught of Eustace lives. Dangerous
it may be--feeble it must be--yet live it shall, the proud
determination to serve the Church of which I am a member, and to
combat the heresies by which she is assailed." Thus spoke, at least
thus thought, a man zealous according to his imperfect knowledge,
confounding the vital interests of Christianity with the extravagant
and usurped claims of the Church of Rome, and defending his cause with
an ardour worthy of a better.

While moving onward in this contemplative mood, he could not help
thinking more than once, that he saw in his path the form of a female
dressed in white, who appeared in the attitude of lamentation. But the
impression was only momentary, and whenever he looked steadily to the
point where he conceived the figure appeared, it always proved that he
had mistaken some natural object, a white crag, or the trunk of a
decayed birch-tree with its silver bark, for the appearance in
question.

Father Eustace had dwelt too long in Rome to partake the superstitious
feelings of the more ignorant Scottish clergy; yet he certainly
thought it extraordinary, that so strong an impression should have
been made on his mind by the legend of the Sacristan. "It is strange,"
he said to himself, "that this story, which doubtless was the
invention of Brother Philip to cover his own impropriety of conduct,
should run so much in my head, and disturb my more serious thoughts--I
am wont, I think, to have more command over my senses. I will repeat
my prayers, and banish such folly from my recollection."

The monk accordingly began with devotion to tell his beads, in pursuance
of the prescribed rule of his order, and was not again disturbed by any
wanderings of the imagination, until he found himself beneath the little
fortalice of Glendearg.

Dame Glendinning, who stood at the gate, set up a shout of surprise and
joy at seeing the good father. "Martin," she said, "Jasper, where be a'
the folk?--help the right reverend Sub-Prior to dismount, and take his
mule from him.--O father! God has sent you in our need--I was just going
to send man and horse to the convent, though I ought to be ashamed to
give so much trouble to your reverences."

"Our trouble matters not, good dame," said Father Eustace; "in what
can I pleasure you? I came hither to visit the Lady of Avenel."

"Well-a-day!" said Dame Alice, "and it was on her part that I had the
boldness to think of summoning you, for the good lady will never be able
to wear over the day!--Would it please you to go to her chamber?"

"Hath she not been shriven by Father Philip?" said the monk.

"Shriven she was," said the Dame of Glendearg, "and by Father Philip,
as your reverence truly says--but--I wish it may have been a clean
shrift--Methought Father Philip looked but moody upon it--and there
was a book which he took away with him, that--" She paused as if
unwilling to proceed.

"Speak out, Dame Glendinning," said the Father; "with us it is your
duty to have no secrets."

"Nay, if it please your reverence, it is not that I would keep
anything from your reverence's knowledge, but I fear I should
prejudice the lady in your opinion; for she is an excellent
lady--months and years has she dwelt in this tower, and none more
exemplary than she; but this matter, doubtless, she will explain it
herself to your reverence."

"I desire first to know it from you, Dame Glendinning," said the monk;
"and I again repeat, it is your duty to tell it to me."

"This book, if it please your reverence, which Father Philip removed
from Glendearg, was this morning returned to us in a strange manner,"
said the good widow.

"Returned!" said the monk; "how mean you?"

"I mean," answered Dame Glendinning, "that it was brought back to the
tower of Glendearg, the saints best know how--that same book which
Father Philip carried with him but yesterday. Old Martin, that is my
tasker and the lady's servant, was driving out the cows to the
pasture--for we have three good milk-cows, reverend father, blessed be
Saint Waldave, and thanks to the holy Monastery--"

The monk groaned with impatience; but he remembered that a woman of
the good dame's condition was like a top, which, if you let it spin on
untouched, must at last come to a pause; but, if you interrupt it by
flogging, there is no end to its gyrations. "But, to speak no more of
the cows, your reverence, though they are likely cattle as ever were
tied to a stake, the tasker was driving them out, and the lads, that
is my Halbert and my Edward, that your reverence has seen at church on
holidays, and especially Halbert,--for you patted him on the head and
gave him a brooch of Saint Cuthbert, which he wears in his
bonnet,--and little Mary Avenel, that is the lady's daughter, they ran
all after the cattle, and began to play up and down the pasture as
young folk will, your reverence. And at length they lost sight of
Martin and the cows; and they began to run up a little cleugh which we
call _Corri-nan-Shian_, where there is a wee bit stripe of a
burn, and they saw there--Good guide us!--a White Woman sitting on the
burnside wringing her hands--so the bairns were frighted to see a
strange woman sitting there, all but Halbert, who will be sixteen come
Whitsuntide; and, besides, he never feared ony thing--and when they
went up to her--behold she was passed away!"

"For shame, good woman!" said Father Eustace; "a woman of your sense
to listen to a tale so idle!--the young folk told you a lie, and that
was all."

"Nay, sir, it was more than that," said the old dame; "for, besides
that they never told me a lie in their lives, I must warn you that on
the very ground where the White Woman was sitting, they found the Lady
of Avenel's book, and brought it with them to the tower."

"That is worthy of mark at least," said the monk. "Know you no other
copy of this volume within these bounds?"

"None, your reverence," returned Elspeth; "why should there?--no one
could read it were there twenty."

"Then you are sure it is the very same volume which you gave to Father
Philip?" said the monk.

"As sure as that I now speak with your reverence."

"It is most singular!" said the monk; and he walked across the room in
a musing posture.

"I have been upon nettles to hear what your reverence would say,"
continued Dame Glendinning, "respecting this matter--There is nothing
I would not do for the Lady of Avenel and her family, and that has
been proved, and for her servants to boot, both Martin and Tibb,
although Tibb is not so civil sometimes as altogether I have a right
to expect; but I cannot think it beseeming to have angels, or ghosts,
or fairies, or the like, waiting upon a leddy when she is in another
woman's house, in respect it is no ways creditable. Ony thing she had
to do was always done to her hand, without costing her either pains or
pence, as a country body says; and besides the discredit, I cannot but
think that there is no safety in having such unchancy creatures about
ane. But I have tied red thread round the bairns's throats," (so her
fondness still called them,) "and given ilka ane of them a riding-wand
of rowan-tree, forby sewing up a slip of witch-elm into their
doublets; and I wish to know of your reverence if there be ony thing
mair that a lone woman can do in the matter of ghosts and fairies?--Be
here! that I should have named their unlucky names twice ower!"

"Dame Glendinning," answered the monk, somewhat abruptly, when the
good woman had finished her narrative, "I pray you, do you know the
miller's daughter?"

"Did I know Kate Happer?" replied the widow; "as well as the beggar
knows his dish--a canty quean was Kate, and a special cummer of my ain
maybe twenty years syne."

"She cannot be the wench I mean," said Father Eustace; "she after whom
I inquire is scarce fifteen, a black-eyed girl--you may have seen her
at the kirk."

"Your reverence must be in the right; and she is my cummer's nie'ce,
doubtless, that you are pleased to speak of: but I thank God I have
always been too duteous in attention to the mass, to know whether
young wenches have black eyes or green ones."

The good father had so much of the world about him, that he was unable
to avoid smiling, when the dame boasted her absolute resistance to a
temptation, which was not quite so liable to beset her as those of the
other sex.

"Perhaps, then," he said, "you know her usual dress, Dame Glendinning?"

"Ay, ay, father," answered the dame readily enough, "a white kirtle
the wench wears, to hide the dust of the mill, no doubt--and a blue
hood, that might weel be spared, for pridefulness."

"Then, may it not be she," said the father, "who has brought back this
book, and stepped out of the way when the children came near her?"

The dame paused--was unwilling to combat the solution suggested by the
monk--but was at a loss to conceive why the lass of the mill should
come so far from home into so wild a corner merely to leave an old
book with three children, from whose observation she wished to conceal
herself.

Above all, she could not understand why, since she had acquaintances
in the family, and since the Dame Glendinning had always paid her
multure and knaveship duly, the said lass of the mill had not come in
to rest herself and eat a morsel, and tell her the current news of the
water.

These very objections satisfied the monk that his conjectures were
right.  "Dame," he said, "you must be cautious in what you say. This
is an instance--I would it were the sole one--of the power of the
Enemy in these days. The matter must be sifted--with a curious and a
careful hand."

"Indeed," said Elspeth, trying to catch and chime in with the ideas of
the Sub-Prior, "I have often thought the miller's folk at the
Monastery-mill were far over careless in sifting our melder, and in
bolting it too--some folk say they will not stick at whiles to put in
a handful of ashes amongst Christian folk's corn-meal."

"That shall be looked after also, dame," said the Sub-Prior, not
displeased to see that the good old woman went off on a false scent;
"and now, by your leave, I will see this lady--do you go before, and
prepare her to see me."

Dame Glendinning left the lower apartment accordingly, which the monk
paced in anxious reflection, considering how he might best discharge,
with humanity as well as with effect, the important duty imposed on
him. He resolved to approach the bedside of the sick person with
reprimands, mitigated only by a feeling for her weak condition--he
determined, in case of her reply, to which late examples of hardened
heretics might encourage her, to be prepared with answers to the
customary scruples. High fraught, also, with zeal against her
unauthorized intrusion into the priestly function, by study of the
Sacred Scriptures, he imagined to himself the answers which one of the
modern school of heresy might return to him--the victorious refutation
which should lay the disputant prostrate at the Confessor's mercy--and
the healing, yet awful exhortation, which, under pain of refusing the
last consolations of religion, he designed to make to the penitent,
conjuring her, as she loved her own soul's welfare, to disclose to him
what she knew of the dark mystery of iniquity, by which heresies were
introduced into the most secluded spots of the very patrimony of the
Church herself--what agents they had who could thus glide, as it were
unseen, from place to place, bring back the volume which the Church
had interdicted to the spots from which it had been removed under her
express auspices; and, who, by encouraging the daring and profane
thirst after knowledge forbidden and useless to the laity, had
encouraged the fisher of souls to use with effect his old bait of
ambition and vain-glory.

Much of this premeditated disputation escaped the good father, when
Elspeth returned, her tears flowing faster than her apron could dry
them, and made him a signal to follow her. "How," said the monk, "is
she then so near her end?--nay, the Church must not break or bruise,
when comfort is yet possible;" and forgetting his polemics, the good
Sub-Prior hastened to the little apartment, where, on the wretched bed
which she had occupied since her misfortunes had driven her to the
Tower of Glendearg, the widow of Walter Avenel had rendered up her
spirit to her Creator. "My God!" said the Sub-Prior, "and has my
unfortunate dallying suffered her to depart without the Church's
consolation! Look to her, dame," he exclaimed, with eager impatience;
"is there not yet a sparkle of the life left?--may she not be
recalled--recalled but for a moment?--Oh! would that she could
express, but by the most imperfect word--but by the most feeble
motion, her acquiescence in the needful task of penitential
prayer!--Does she not breathe?--Art thou sure she doth not?"

"She will never breathe more," said the matron. "Oh! the poor
fatherless girl--now motherless also--Oh, the kind companion I have
had these many years, whom I shall never see again! But she is in
heaven for certain, if ever woman went there; for a woman of better
life----"

"Wo to me," said the good monk, "if indeed she went not hence in good
assurance--wo to the reckless shepherd, who suffered the wolf to carry
a choice one from the flock, while he busied himself with trimming his
sling and his staff to give the monster battle! Oh! if in the long
Hereafter, aught but weal should that poor spirit share, what has my
delay cost?--the value of an immortal soul!"

He then approached the body, full of the deep remorse natural to a
good man of his persuasion, who devoutly believed the doctrines of the
Catholic Church. "Ay," said he, gazing on the pallid corpse, from
which the spirit had parted so placidly as to leave a smile upon the
thin blue lips, which had been so long wasted by decay that they had
parted with the last breath of animation without the slightest
convulsive tremor--"Ay," said Father Eustace, "there lies the faded
tree, and, as it fell, so it lies--awful thought for me, should my
neglect have left it to descend in an evil direction!" He then again
and again conjured Dame Glendinning to tell him what she knew of the
demeanour and ordinary walk of the deceased.

All tended to the high honour of the deceased lady; for her companion,
who admired her sufficiently while alive, notwithstanding some
trifling points of jealousy, now idolized her after her death, and
could think of no attribute of praise with which she did not adorn her
memory.

Indeed, the Lady of Avenel, however she might privately doubt some of
the doctrines announced by the Church of Rome, and although she had
probably tacitly appealed from that corrupted system of Christianity
to the volume on which Christianity itself is founded, had
nevertheless been regular in her attendance on the worship of the
Church, not, perhaps, extending her scruples so far as to break off
communion. Such indeed was the first sentiment of the earlier
reformers, who seemed to have studied, for a time at least, to avoid a
schism, until the violence of the Pope rendered it inevitable.

Father Eustace, on the present occasion, listened with eagerness to
everything which could lead to assure him of the lady's orthodoxy in
the main points of belief; for his conscience reproached him sorely,
that, instead of protracting conversation with the Dame of Glendearg,
he had not instantly hastened where his presence was so necessary.
"If," he said, addressing the dead body, "thou art yet free from the
utmost penalty due to the followers of false doctrine--if thou dost
but suffer for a time, to expiate faults done in the body, but
partaking of mortal frailty more than of deadly sin, fear not that thy
abode shall be long in the penal regions to which thou mayest be
doomed--if vigils--if masses--if penance--if maceration of my body,
till it resembles that extenuated form which the soul hath abandoned,
may assure thy deliverance. The Holy Church--the godly foundation--our
blessed Patroness herself, shall intercede for one whose errors were
counter-balanced by so many virtues.--Leave me, dame--here, and by her
bed-side, will I perform those duties--which this piteous case
demands!"

Elspeth left the monk, who employed himself in fervent and sincere,
though erroneous prayers, for the weal of the departed spirit. For an
hour he remained in the apartment of death, and then returned to the
hall, where he found the still weeping friend of the deceased.

But it would be injustice to Mrs. Glendinning's hospitality, if we
suppose her to have been weeping during this long interval, or rather
if we suppose her so entirely absorbed by the tribute of sorrow which
she paid frankly and plentifully to her deceased friend, as to be
incapable of attending to the rights of hospitality due to the holy
visitor--who was confessor at once, and Sub-Prior--mighty in all
religious and secular considerations, so far as the vassals of the
Monastery were interested.

Her barley-bread had been toasted--her choicest cask of home-brewed
ale had been broached--her best butter had been placed on the
hall-table, along with her most savoury ham, and her choicest cheese,
ere she abandoned herself to the extremity of sorrow; and it was not
till she had arranged her little repast neatly on the board, that she
sat down in the chimney corner, threw her checked apron over her head,
and gave way to the current of tears and sobs. In this there was no
grimace or affectation.  The good dame held the honours of her house
to be as essential a duty, especially when a monk was her visitant, as
any other pressing call upon her conscience; nor until these were
suitably attended to did she find herself at liberty to indulge her
sorrow for her departed friend.

When she was conscious of the Sub-Prior's presence, she rose with the
same attention to his reception; but he declined all the offers of
hospitality with which she endeavoured to tempt him. Not her butter,
as yellow as gold, and the best, she assured him, that was made in the
patrimony of St.  Mary--not the barley scones, which "the departed
saint, God sain her!  used to say were so good"--not the ale, nor any
other cates which poor Elspeth's stores afforded, could prevail on the
Sub-Prior to break his fast.  "This day," he said, "I must not taste
food until the sun go down, happy if, in so doing, I can expiate my
own negligence--happier still, if my sufferings of this trifling
nature, undertaken in pure faith and singleness of heart, may benefit
the soul of the deceased. Yet, dame," he added, I may not so far
forget the living in my cares for the dead, as to leave behind me that
book, which is to the ignorant what, to our first parents, the tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil unhappily proved-excellent indeed in
itself, but fatal because used by those to whom it is prohibited."

"Oh, blithely, reverend father," said the widow of Simon Glendinning,
"will I give you the book, if so be I can while it from the bairns;
and indeed, poor things, as the case stands with them even now, you
might take the heart out of their bodies, and they never find it out,
they are sae begrutten." [Footnote: _Begrutten_--over-weeped]

"Give them this missal instead, good dame," said the father, drawing
from his pocket one which was curiously illuminated with paintings,
"and I will come myself, or send one at a fitting time, and teach them
the meaning of these pictures."

"The bonny images!" said Dame Glendinning, forgetting for an instant
her grief in her admiration, "and weel I wot," added she, "it is
another sort of a book than the poor Lady of Avenel's; and blessed
might we have been this day, if your reverence had found the way up
the glen, instead of Father Philip, though the Sacristan is a powerful
man too, and speaks as if he would ger the house fly abroad, save that
the walls are gey thick.  Simon's forebears (may he and they be
blessed!) took care of that."

The monk ordered his mule, and was about to take his leave; and the
good dame was still delaying him with questions about the funeral,
when a horseman, armed and accoutred, rode into the little court-yard
which surrounded the Keep.




Chapter the Ninth.


  For since they rode among our doors
  With splent on spauld and rusty spurs,
  There grows no fruit into our furs;
    Thus said John Up-on-land.
                       DANNATYNE MS.

The Scottish laws, which were as wisely and judiciously made as they
were carelessly and ineffectually executed, had in vain endeavoured to
restrain the damage done to agriculture, by the chiefs and landed
proprietors retaining in their service what were called jack-men, from
the _jack_, or doublet, quilted with iron which they wore as
defensive armour.  These military retainers conducted themselves with
great insolence towards the industrious part of the community--lived
in a great measure by plunder, and were ready to execute any commands
of their master, however unlawful.  In adopting this mode of life, men
resigned the quiet hopes and regular labours of industry, for an
unsettled, precarious, and dangerous trade, which yet had such charms
for those once accustomed to it, that they became incapable of
following any other. Hence the complaint of John Upland, a fictitious
character, representing a countryman, into whose mouth the poets of
the day put their general satires upon men and manners.

  They ride about in such a rage,
  By forest, frith, and field,
    With buckler, bow, and brand.
  Lo! where they ride out through the rye!
  The Devil mot save the company,
    Quoth John Up-on-land.

Christie of the Clinthill, the horseman who now arrived at the little
Tower of Glendearg, was one of the hopeful company of whom the poet
complains, as was indicated by his "splent on spauld," (iron-plates on
his shoulder,) his rusted spurs, and his long lance. An iron
skull-cap, none of the brightest, bore for distinction a sprig of the
holly, which was Avenel's badge. A long two-edged straight sword,
having a handle made of polished oak, hung down by his side. The
meagre condition of his horse, and the wild and emaciated look of the
rider, showed their occupation could not be accounted an easy or a
thriving one. He saluted Dame Glendinning with little courtesy, and
the monk with less; for the growing, disrespect to the religious
orders had not failed to extend itself among a class of men of such
disorderly habits, although it may be supposed they were tolerably
indifferent alike to the new or the ancient doctrines.

"So, our lady is dead, Dame Glendinning?" said the jack-man; "my
master has sent you even now a fat bullock for her mart--it may serve
for her funeral. I have left him in the upper cleugh, as he is
somewhat kenspeckle, [Footnote: _Kenspeckle>/I>--that which is
easily recognized by the eye.] and is marked both with cut and
birn--the sooner the skin is off, and he is in saultfat, the less like
you are to have trouble--you understand me? Let me have a peck of corn
for my horse, and beef and beer for myself, for I must go on to the
Monastery--though I think this monk hero might do mine errand."

"Thine errand, rude man!" said the Sub-Prior, knitting his brows--

"For God's sake" cried poor Dame Glendinning, terrified at the idea of
a quarrel between them,--"O Christie!---it is the Sub-Prior--O
reverend sir, it is Christie of the Clinthill, the laird's chief
jack-man; ye know that little havings can be expected from the like o'
them."

"Are you a retainer of the Laird of Avenel?" said the monk, addressing
himself to the horseman, "and do you speak thus rudely to a Brother of
Saint Mary's, to whom thy master is so much beholden?"

"He means to be yet more beholden to your house, Sir Monk," answered
the fellow; "for hearing his sister-in-law, the widow of Walter of
Avenel, was on her death-bed, he sent me to say to the Father Abbot
and the brethren, that he will hold the funeral-feast at their
convent, and invites himself thereto, with a score of horse and some
friends, and to abide there for three days and three nights,--having
horse-meat and men's-meat at the charge of the community; of which his
intention he sends due notice, that fitting preparation may be
timeously made."

"Friend," said the Sub-Prior, "believe not that I will do to the
Father Abbot the indignity of delivering such an errand.--Think'st
thou the goods of the church were bestowed upon her by holy princes
and pious nobles, now dead and gone, to be consumed in revelry by
every profligate layman who numbers in his train more followers than
he can support by honest means, or by his own incomings? Tell thy
master, from the Sub-Prior of Saint Mary's, that the Primate hath
issued his commands to us that we submit no longer to this compulsory
exaction of hospitality on slight or false pretences. Our lands and
goods were given to relieve pilgrims and pious persons, not to feast
bands of rude soldiers."

"This to me!" said the angry spearman, "this to me and to my master
--Look to yourself then, Sir Priest, and try if _Ave_ and
_Credo_ will keep bullocks from wandering, and hay-stacks from
burning."

"Dost thou menace the Holy Church's patrimony with waste and
fire-raising," said the Sub-Prior, "and that in the face of the sun? I
call on all who hear me to bear witness to the words this ruffian has
spoken. Remember how the Lord James drowned such as you by scores in
the black pool at Jeddart.-To him and to the Primate will I complain."
The soldier shifted the position of his lance, and brought it down to
a level with the monk's body.

Dame Glendinning began to shriek for assistance. "Tibb Tacket! Martin!
where be ye all?--Christie, for the love of God, consider he is a man
of Holy Kirk!"

"I care not for his spear," said the Sub-Prior; "if I am slain in
defending the rights and privileges of my community, the Primate will
know how to take vengeance."

"Let him look to himself," said Christie, but at the same time
depositing his lance against the wall of the tower; "if the Fife men
spoke true who came hither with the Governor in the last raid, Norman
Leslie has him at feud, and is like to set him hard. We know Norman a
true bloodhound, who will never quit the slot. But I had no design to
offend the holy father," he added, thinking perhaps he had gone a
little too far; "I am a rude man, bred to lance and stirrup, and not
used to deal with book-learned men and priests; and I am willing to
ask his forgiveness--and his blessing, if I have said aught amiss."

"For God's sake! your reverence," said the widow of Glendearg apart to
the Sub-Prior, "bestow on him your forgiveness--how shall we poor folk
sleep in security in the dark nights, if the convent is at feud with
such men as he is?"

"You are right, dame," said the Sub-Prior, "your safety should, and
must be, in the first instance consulted.--Soldier, I forgive thee,
and may God bless thee and send thee honesty."

Christie of the Clinthill made an unwilling inclination with his head,
and muttered apart, "that is as much as to say, God send thee
starvation, But now to my master's demand, Sir Priest? What answer am
I to return?"

"That the body of the widow of Walter of Avenel," answered the Father,
"shall be interred as becomes her rank, and in the tomb of her valiant
husband. For your master's proffered visit of three days, with such a
company and retinue, I have no authority to reply to it; you must
intimate your Chief's purpose to the Reverend Lord Abbot."

"That will cost me a farther ride," said the man, "but it is all in
the day's work.--How now, my lad," said he to Halbert, who was
handling the long lance which he had laid aside; "how do you like such
a plaything?--will you go with me and be a moss-trooper?"

"The Saints in their mercy forbid!" said the poor mother; and then,
afraid of having displeased Christie by the vivacity of her
exclamation, she followed it up by explaining, that since Simon's
death she could not look on a spear or a bow, or any implement of
destruction without trembling.

"Pshaw!" answered Christie, "thou shouldst take another husband, dame,
and drive such follies out of thy thoughts--what sayst thou to such a
strapping lad as I? Why, this old tower of thine is fensible enough,
and there is no want of clenchs, and crags, and bogs, and thickets, if
one was set hard; a man might bide here and keep his half-score of
lads, and as many geldings, and live on what he could lay his hand on,
and be kind to thee, old wench."

"Alas! Master Christie," said the matron, "that you should talk to a
lone woman in such a fashion, and death in the house besides!"

"Lone woman!--why, that is the very reason thou shouldst take a mate.
Thy old friend is dead, why, good--choose thou another of somewhat
tougher frame, and that will not die of the pip like a young chicken.--
Better still--Come, dame, let me have something to eat, and we will talk
more of this."

Dame Elspeth, though she well knew the character of the man, whom in
fact she both disliked and feared, could not help simpering at the
personal address which he thought proper to make to her. She whispered
to the Sub-Prior, "ony thing just to keep him quiet," and went into
the tower to set before the soldier the food he desired, trusting
betwixt good cheer and the power of her own charms, to keep Christie
of the Clinthill so well amused, that the altercation betwixt him and
the holy father should not be renewed.

The Sub-Prior was equally unwilling to hazard any unnecessary rupture
between the community and such a person as Julian of Avenel. He was
sensible that moderation, as well as firmness, was necessary to
support the tottering cause of the Church of Rome; and that, contrary
to former times, the quarrels betwixt the clergy and laity had, in the
present, usually terminated to the advantage of the latter. He
resolved, therefore, to avoid farther strife by withdrawing, but
failed not, in the first place, to possess himself of the volume which
the Sacristan carried off the evening before, and which had been
returned to the glen in such a marvellous manner.

Edward, the younger of Dame Elspeth's boys, made great objections to
the book's being removed, in which Mary would probably have joined,
but that she was now in her little sleeping-chamber with Tibb, who was
exerting her simple skill to console the young lady for her mother's
death. But the younger Glendinning stood up in defence of her
property, and, with a positiveness which had hitherto made no part of
his character, declared, that now the kind lady was dead, the book was
Mary's, and no one but Mary should have it.

"But if it is not a fit book for Mary to read, my dear boy," said the
father, gently, "you would not wish it to remain with her?"

"The lady read it," answered the young champion of property; "and so
it could not be wrong--it shall not be taken away.--I wonder where
Halbert is?--listening to the bravading tales of gay Christie, I
reckon,--he is always wishing for fighting, and now he is out of the
way."

"Why, Edward, you would not fight with me, who am both a priest and
old man?"

"If you were as good a priest as the Pope," said the boy, "and as old
as the hills to boot, you shall not carry away Mary's book without her
leave.  I will do battle for it."

"But see you, my love," said the monk, amused with the resolute
friendship manifested by the boy, "I do not take it; I only borrow it;
and I leave in its place my own gay missal, as a pledge I will bring
it again."

Edward opened the missal with eager curiosity, and glanced at the
pictures with which it was illustrated. "Saint George and the dragon--
Halbert will like that; and Saint Michael brandishing his sword over
the head of the Wicked One--and that will do for Halbert too. And see
the Saint John leading his lamb in the wilderness, with his little
cross made of reeds, and his scrip and staff--that shall be my
favourite; and where shall we find one for poor Mary?--here is a
beautiful woman weeping and lamenting herself."

"This is Saint Mary Magdalen repenting of her sins, my dear boy," said
the father.

"That will not suit _our_ Mary; for she commits no faults, and is
never angry with us, but when we do something wrong."

"Then," said the father, "I will show you a Mary, who will protect her
and you, and all good children. See how fairly she is represented,
with her gown covered with golden stars."

The boy was lost in wonder at the portrait of the Virgin, which the
Sub-Prior turned up to him.

"This," he said, "is really like our sweet Mary; and I think I will
let you take away the black book, that has no such goodly shows in it,
and leave this for Mary instead. But you must promise to bring back
the book, good father--for now I think upon it, Mary may like that
best which was her mother's."

"I will certainly return," said the monk, evading his answer, "and
perhaps I may teach you to write and read such beautiful letters as
you see there written, and to paint them blue, green, and yellow, and
to blazon them with gold."

"Ay, and to make such figures as these blessed Saints, and especially
these two Marys?" said the boy.

"With their blessing," said the Sub-Prior, "I can teach you that art
too, so far as I am myself capable of showing, and you of learning
it." "Then," said Edward, "will I paint Mary's picture--and remember
you are to bring back the black book; that you must promise me."

The Sub-Prior, anxious to get rid of the boy's pertinacity, and to set
forward on his return to the convent, without having any further
interview with Christie the galloper, answered by giving the promise
Edward required, mounted his mule, and set forth on his return
homeward.

The November day was well spent ere the Sub-Prior resumed his journey;
for the difficulty of the road, and the various delays which he had
met with at the tower, had detained him longer than he proposed. A
chill easterly wind was sighing among the withered leaves, and
stripping them from the hold they had yet retained on the parent
trees.

"Even so," said the monk, "our prospects in this vale of time grow
more disconsolate as the stream of years passes on. Little have I gained
by my journey, saving the certainty that heresy is busy among us with
more than his usual activity, and that the spirit of insulting religious
orders, and plundering the Church's property, so general in the eastern
districts of Scotland, has now come nearer home."

The tread of a horse which came up behind him, interrupted his reverie,
and he soon saw he was mounted by the same wild rider whom he had left
at the tower.

"Good even, my son, and benedicite," said the Sub-Prior as he passed;
but the rude soldier scarce acknowledged the greeting, by bending his
head; and dashing the spurs into his horse, went on at a pace which
soon left the monk and his mule far behind. And there, thought the
Sub-Prior, goes another plague of the times--a fellow whose birth
designed him to cultivate the earth, but who is perverted by the
unhallowed and unchristian divisions of the country, into a daring and
dissolute robber. The barons of Scotland are now turned masterful
thieves and ruffians, oppressing the poor by violence, and wasting the
Church, by extorting free-quarters from abbeys and priories, without
either shame or reason. I fear me I shall be too late to counsel the
Abbot to make a stand against these daring _sorners_ [Footnote:
To _sorne_, in Scotland, is to exact free quarters against the
will of the landlord. It is declared equivalent to theft, by a statute
passed in the year 1445. The great chieftains oppressed the
monasteries very much by exactions of this nature. The community of
Aberbrothwick complained of an Earl of Angus, I think, who was in the
regular habit of visiting them once a year, with a train of a thousand
horse, and abiding till the whole winter provisions of the convent
were exhausted.]--I must make haste." He struck his mule with his
riding wand accordingly; but, instead of mending her pace, the animal
suddenly started from the path, and the rider's utmost efforts could
not force her forward.

"Art thou, too, infected with the spirit of the times?" said the
Sub-Prior; "thou wert wont to be ready and serviceable, and art now as
restive as any wild jack-man or stubborn heretic of them all."

While he was contending with the startled animal, a voice, like that
of a female, chanted in his ear, or at least very close to it,

 "Good evening-. Sir Priest, and so late as you ride,
  With your mule so fair, and your mantle so wide;
  But ride you through valley, or ride you o'er hill.
  There is one that has warrant to wait on you still.
               Back, back,
               The volume black!
  I have a warrant to carry it back."

The Sub-Prior looked around, but neither bush nor brake was near which
could conceal an ambushed songstress. "May Our Lady have mercy on me!"
he said; "I trust my senses have not forsaken me--yet how my thoughts
should arrange themselves into rhymes which I despise, and music which
I care not for, or why there should be the sound of a female voice in
ears, in which its melody has been so long indifferent, baffles my
comprehension, and almost realizes the vision of Philip the Sacristan.
Come, good mule, betake thee to the path, and let us hence while our
judgment serves us."

But the mule stood as if it had been rooted to the spot, backed from
the point to which it was pressed by its rider, and by her ears laid
close into her neck, and her eyes almost starting from their sockets,
testified that she was under great terror.

While the Sub-Prior, by alternate threats and soothing, endeavoured to
reclaim the wayward animal to her duty, the wild musical voice was again
heard close beside him.

  "What, ho! Sub-Prior, and came you but here
  To conjure a book from a dead woman's bier?
  Sain you, and save you, be wary and wise,
  Ride back with the book, or you'll pay for your prize.
               Back, back.
               There's death in the track!
  In the name of my master I bid thee bear back."

"In the name of MY Master," said the astonished monk, "that name
before which all things created tremble, I conjure thee to say what
thou art that hauntest me thus?"

The same voice replied,

  "That which is neither ill nor well.
  That which belongs not to Heaven nor to hell,
  A wreath of the mist, a bubble of the stream,
  'Twixt a waking thought and a sleeping dream;
               A form that men spy
               With the half-shut eye.
  In the beams of the setting sun, am I."

"This is more than simple fantasy," said the Sub-Prior, rousing
himself; though, notwithstanding the natural hardihood of his temper,
the sensible presence of a supernatural being so near him, failed not
to make his blood run cold, and his hair bristle. "I charge thee," he
said aloud, "be thine errand what it will, to depart and trouble me no
more! False spirit, thou canst not appal any save those who do the
work negligently." The voice immediately answered:

  "Vainly, Sir Prior. wouldst thou bar me my right!
  Like the star when it shoots, I can dart through the night;
  I can dance on the torrent and ride on the air,
  And travel the world with the bonny night-mare.
                 Again, again,
                At the crook of the glen,
  Where bickers the burnie, I'll meet thee again."

The road was now apparently left open; for the mule collected herself,
and changed from her posture of terror to one which promised advance,
although a profuse perspiration, and general trembling of the joints,
indicated the bodily terror she had undergone.

"I used to doubt the existence of Cabalists and Rosicrucians," thought
the Sub-Prior, "but, by my Holy Order, I know no longer what to say!--
My pulse beats temperately--my hand is cool--I am fasting from
everything but sin, and possessed of my ordinary faculties--Either
some fiend is permitted to bewilder me, or the tales of Cornelius
Agrippa, Paracelsus, and others who treat of occult philosophy, are
not without foundation.--At the crook of the glen? I could have
desired to avoid a second meeting, but I am on the service of the
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against me."

He moved around accordingly, but with precaution, and not without
fear; for he neither knew the manner in which, or the place where his
journey might be next interrupted by his invisible attendant. He
descended the glen without interruption for about a mile farther,
when, just at the spot where the brook approached the steep hill, with
a winding so abrupt as to leave scarcely room for a horse to pass, the
mule was again visited with the same symptoms of terror which had
before interrupted her course. Better acquainted than before with the
cause of her restiveness, the Priest employed no effort to make her
proceed, but addressed himself to the object, which he doubted not was
the same that had formerly interrupted him, in the words of solemn
exorcism prescribed by the Church of Rome on such occasions.

In reply to his demand, the voice again sung;--

  "Men of good are bold as sackless,[Footnote: Sackless--Innocent.]
  Men of rude are wild and reckless,
      Lie thou still
      In the nook of the hill.
  For those be before thee that wish thee ill."

While the Sub-Prior listened, with his head turned in the direction
from which the sounds seemed to come, he felt as if something rushed
against him; and ere he could discover the cause, he was pushed from
his saddle with gentle but irresistible force. Before he reached the
ground his senses were gone, and he lay long in a state of
insensibility; for the sunset had not ceased to gild the top of the
distant hill when he fell,--and when he again became conscious of
existence, the pale moon was gleaming on the landscape. He awakened in
a state of terror, from which, for a few minutes, he found it
difficult to shake himself free. At length he sate upon the grass, and
became sensible, by repeated exertion, that the only personal injury
which he had sustained was the numbness arising from extreme cold. The
motion of something near him made the blood again run to his heart,
and by a sudden effort he started up, and, looking around, saw to his
relief that the noise was occasioned by the footsteps of his own mule.
The peaceable animal had remained quietly beside her master during his
trance, browsing on the grass which grew plentifully in that
sequestered nook.

With some exertion he collected himself, remounted the animal, and
meditating upon his wild adventure, descended the glen till its
junction with the broader valley through which the Tweed winds. The
drawbridge was readily dropped at his first summons; and so much had
he won upon the heart of the churlish warden, that Peter appeared
himself with a lantern to show the Sub-Prior his way over the perilous
pass.

"By my sooth, sir," he said, holding the light up to Father Eustace's
face, "you look sorely travelled and deadly pale--but a little matter
serves to weary out you men of the cell. I now who speak to you--I
have ridden--before I was perched up here on this pillar betwixt wind
and water--it may be thirty Scots miles before I broke my fast, and
have had the red of a bramble rose in my cheek all the while--But will
you taste some food, or a cup of distilled waters?"

"I may not," said Father Eustace, "being under a vow; but I thank you
for your kindness, and pray you to give what I may not accept to the
next poor pilgrim who comes hither pale and fainting, for so it shall
be the better both with him here, and with you hereafter."

"By my faith, and I will do so," said Peter Bridge-Ward, "even for thy
sake--It is strange now, how this Sub-Prior gets round one's heart
more than the rest of these cowled gentry, that think of nothing but
quaffing and stuffing!--Wife, I say--wife, we will give a cup of
distilled waters and a crust of bread unto the next pilgrim that comes
over; and ye may keep for [Footnote: An old-fashioned name for an
earthen jar for holding spirits.] the purpose the grunds of the last
greybeard, and the ill-baked bannock which the bairns couldna eat."

While Peter issued these charitable, and, at the same time, prudent
injunctions, the Sub-Prior, whose mild interference had awakened the
Bridge-Ward to such an act of unwonted generosity, was pacing onward
to the Monastery. In the way, he had to commune with and subdue his
own rebellious heart, an enemy, he was sensible, more formidable than
any which the external powers of Satan could place in his way.

Father Eustace had indeed strong temptation to suppress the
extraordinary incident which had befallen him, which he was the more
reluctant to confess, because he had passed so severe a judgment upon
Father Philip, who, as he was not unwilling to allow, had, on his
return from Glendearg, encountered obstacles somewhat similar to his
own. Of this the Sub-Prior was the more convinced, when, feeling in
his bosom for the Book which he had brought off from the Tower of
Glendearg, he found it was amissing, which he could only account for
by supposing it had been stolen from him during his trance.

"If I confess this strange visitation," thought the Sub-Prior, "I
become the ridicule of all my brethren--I whom the Primate sent hither
to be a watch, as it were, and a check upon their follies. I give the
Abbot an advantage over me which I shall never again recover, and
Heaven only knows how he may abuse it, in his foolish simplicity, to
the dishonour and loss of Holy Kirk.--But then, if I make not true
confession of my shame, with what face can I again presume to admonish
or restrain others?--Avow, proud heart," continued he, addressing
himself, "that the weal of Holy Church interests thee less in this
matter than thine own humiliation--Yes, Heaven has punished thee even
in that point in which thou didst deem thyself most strong, in thy
spiritual pride and thy carnal wisdom. Thou hast laughed at and
derided the inexperience of thy brethren--stoop thyself in turn to
their derision--tell what they may not believe--affirm that which they
will ascribe to idle fear, or perhaps to idle falsehood--sustain the
disgrace of a silly visionary, or a wilful deceiver.--Be it so, I will
do my duty, and make ample confession to my Superior. If the discharge
of this duty destroys my usefulness in this house, God and Our Lady
will send me where I can better serve them."

There was no little merit in the resolution thus piously and
generously formed by Father Eustace. To men of any rank the esteem of
their order is naturally most dear; but in the monastic establishment,
cut off, as the brethren are, from other objects of ambition, as well
as from all exterior friendship and relationship, the place which they
hold in the opinion of each other is all in all.

But the consciousness how much he should rejoice the Abbot and most of
the other monks of Saint Mary's, who were impatient of the
unauthorized, yet irresistible control, which he was wont to exercise
in the affairs of the convent, by a confession which would put him in
a ludicrous, or perhaps even in a criminal point of view, could not
weigh with Father Eustace in comparison with the task which his belief
enjoined.

As, strong in his feelings of duty, he approached the exterior gate of
the Monastery, he was surprised to see torches gleaming, and men
assembled around it, some on horseback, some on foot, while several of
the monks, distinguished through the night by their white scapularies,
were making themselves busy among the crowd. The Sub-Prior was
received with a unanimous shout of joy, which at once made him
sensible that he had himself been the object of their anxiety.

"There he is! there he is! God be thanked--there he is, hale and
fear!" exclaimed the vassals; while the monks exclaimed, "_Te Deum
laudamus_--the blood of thy servants is precious in thy sight!"

"What is the matter, children? what is the matter, my brethren?" said
Father Eustace, dismounting at the gate.

"Nay, brother, if thou know'st not, we will not tell thee till thou
art in the refectory," answered the monks; "suffice it that the Lord
Abbot had ordered these, our zealous and faithful vassals, instantly
to set forth to guard thee from imminent peril--Ye may ungirth your
horses, children, and dismiss; and to-morrow, each who was at this
rendezvous may send to the convent kitchen for a quarter of a yard of
roast beef, and a black-jack full of double ale." [Footnote: It was
one of the few reminiscences of Old Parr, or Henry Jenkins, I forget
which, that, at some convent in the veteran's neighbourhood, the
community, before the dissolution, used to dole out roast-beef in the
measure of feet and yards.]

The vassals dispersed with joyful acclamation, and the monks, with equal
jubilee, conducted the Sub-Prior into the refectory.




Chapter the Tenth.


  Here we stand--
  Woundless and well, may Heaven's high name be bless'd for't!
  As erst, ere treason couch'd a lance against us.
                                                  Decker.

No sooner was the Sub-Prior hurried into the refectory by his
rejoicing companions, than the first person on whom he fixed his eye
proved to be Christie of the Clinthill. He was seated in the
chimney-corner, fettered and guarded, his features drawn into that air
of sulky and turbid resolution with which those hardened in guilt are
accustomed to view the approach of punishment. But as the Sub-Prior
drew near to him, his face assumed a more wild and startled
expression, while he exclaimed--"The devil! the devil himself, brings
the dead back upon the living."

"Nay," said a monk to him, "say rather that Our Lady foils the
attempts of the wicked on her faithful servants--our dear brother
lives and moves."

"Lives and moves!" said the ruffian, rising and shuffling towards the
Sub-Prior as well as his chains would permit; "nay, then, I will never
trust ashen shaft and steel point more--It is even so," he added, as he
gazed on the Sub-Prior with astonishment; "neither wem nor wound--not
as much as a rent in his frock!"

"And whence should my wound have come?" said Father Eustace.

"From the good lance that never failed me before," replied Christie of
the Clinthill.

"Heaven absolve thee for thy purpose!" said the Sub-Prior; "wouldst
thou have slain a servant of the altar?"

"To choose!" answered Christie; "the Fifemen say, an the whole pack
of ye were slain, there were more lost at Flodden."

"Villain! art thou heretic as well as murderer?"

"Not I, by Saint Giles," replied the rider; "I listened blithely
enough to the Laird of Monance, when he told me ye were all cheats and
knaves; but when he would have had me go hear one Wiseheart, a
gospeller as they call him, he might as well have persuaded the wild
colt that had flung one rider to kneel down and help another into the
saddle."

"There is some goodness about him yet," said the Sacristan to the Abbot,
who at that moment entered--"He refused to hear a heretic preacher."

"The better for him in the next world," answered the Abbot. "Prepare
for death, my son,--we deliver thee over to the secular arm of our
bailie, for execution on the Gallow-hill by peep of light."

"Amen!" said the ruffian; "'tis the end I must have come by sooner or
later--and what care I whether I feed the crows at Saint Mary's or at
Carlisle?"

"Let me implore your reverend patience for an instant," said the
Sub-Prior; "until I shall inquire--"

"What!" exclaimed the Abbot, observing him for the first time--"Our
dear brother restored to us when his life was unhoped for!--nay, kneel
not to a sinner like me--stand up--thou hast my blessing. When this
villain came to the gate, accused by his own evil conscience, and
crying out he had murdered thee, I thought that the pillar of our main
aisle had fallen--no more shall a life so precious be exposed to such
risks as occur in this border country; no longer shall one beloved and
rescued of Heaven hold so low a station in the church as that of a
poor Sub-Prior--I will write by express to the Primate for thy speedy
removal and advancement."

"Nay, but let me understand," said the Sub-Prior; "did this soldier say
he had slain me?"

"That he had transfixed you," answered the Abbot, "in full career with
his lance--but it seems he had taken an indifferent aim. But no sooner
didst thou fall to the ground mortally gored, as he deemed, with his
weapon, than our blessed Patroness appeared to him, as he averred--"

"I averred no such thing," said the prisoner; "I said a woman in white
interrupted me, as I was about to examine the priest's cassock, for
they are usually well lined--she had a bulrush in her hand, with one
touch of which she struck me from my horse, as I might strike down a
child of four years old with an iron mace--and then, like a singing
fiend as she was, she sung to me.

  'Thank the holly-bush
    That nods on thy brow;
  Or with this slender rush
    I had strangled thee now.'

I gathered myself up with fear and difficulty, threw myself on my horse,
and came hither like a fool to get myself hanged for a rogue."

"Thou seest, honoured brother," said the Abbot to the Sub-Prior, "in
what favour thou art with our blessed Patroness, that she herself
becomes the guardian of thy paths--Not since the days of our blessed
founder hath she shown such grace to any one. All unworthy were we to
hold spiritual superiority over thee, and we pray thee to prepare for
thy speedy removal to Aberbrothwick."

"Alas! my lord and father," said the Sub-Prior, "your words pierce my
very soul. Under the seal of confession will I presently tell thee why
I conceive myself rather the baffled sport of a spirit of another
sort, than the protected favourite of the heavenly powers. But first
let me ask this unhappy man a question or two."

"Do as ye list," replied the Abbot--"but you shall not convince me
that it is fitting you remain in this inferior office in the convent
of Saint Mary."

"I would ask of this poor man," said Father Eustace, "for what purpose
he nourished the thought of putting to death one who never did him
evil?"

"Ay! but thou didst menace me with evil," said the ruffian, "and no
one but a fool is menaced twice. Dost thou not remember what you said
touching the Primate and Lord James, and the black pool of Jedwood?
Didst thou think me fool enough to wait till thou hadst betrayed me to
the sack and the fork! There were small wisdom in that, methinks--as
little as in coming hither to tell my own misdeeds--I think the devil
was in me when I took this road--I might have remembered the proverb,
'Never Friar forgot feud.'"

"And it was solely for that--for that only hasty word of mine, uttered
in a moment of impatience, and forgotten ere it was well spoken?" said
Father Eustace.

"Ay! for that, and--for the love of thy gold crucifix," said Christie of
the Clinthill.

"Gracious Heaven! and could the yellow metal--the glittering earth--
so far overcome every sense of what is thereby represented?--Father
Abbot, I pray, as a dear boon, you will deliver this guilty person to
my mercy."

"Nay, brother," interposed the Sacristan, "to your doom, if you will,
not to your mercy--Remember, we are not all equally favoured by our
blessed Lady, nor is it likely that every frock in the Convent will
serve as a coat of proof when a lance is couched against it."

"For that very reason," said the Sub-Prior, "I would not that for my
worthless self the community were to fall at feud with Julian of Avenel,
this man's master."

"Our Lady forbid!" said the Sacristan, "he is a second Julian the
Apostate."

"With our reverend father the Abbot's permission, then," said Father
Eustace, "I desire this man be freed from his chains, and suffered to
depart uninjured;--and here, friend," he added, giving him the golden
crucifix, "is the image for which thou wert willing to stain thy hands
with murder.  View it well, and may it inspire thee with other and
better thoughts than those which referred to it as a piece of bullion!
Part with it, nevertheless, if thy necessities require, and get thee
one of such coarse substance that Mammon shall have no share in any of
the reflections to which it gives rise. It was the bequest of a dear
friend to me; but dearer service can it never do than that of winning
a soul to Heaven."

The Borderer, now freed from his chains, stood gazing alternately on
the Sub-Prior, and on the golden crucifix. "By Saint Giles," said he,
"I understand ye not!--An ye give me gold for couching my lance at
thee, what would you give me to level it at a heretic?"

"The Church," said the Sub-Prior, "will try the effect of her
spiritual censures to bring these stray sheep into the fold, ere she
employ the edge of the sword of Saint Peter."

"Ay, but," said the ruffian, "they say the Primate recommends a little
strangling and burning in aid of both censure and of sword. But fare ye
weel, I owe you a life, and it may be I will not forget my debt."

The bailie now came bustling in, dressed in his blue coat and
bandaliers, and attended by two or three halberdiers. "I have been a
thought too late in waiting upon your reverend lordship. I am grown
somewhat fatter since the field of Pinkie, and my leathern coat slips
not on so soon as it was wont; but the dungeon is ready, and though,
as I said, I have been somewhat late--"

Here his intended prisoner walked gravely up to the officer's nose, to
his great amazement.

"You have been indeed somewhat late, bailie," said he, "and I am
greatly obligated to your buff-coat, and to the time you took to put
it on.  If the secular arm had arrived some quarter of an hour sooner,
I had been out of the reach of spiritual grace; but as it is, I wish
you good even, and a safe riddance out of your garment of durance, in
which you have much the air of a hog in armour."

Wroth was the bailie at this comparison, and exclaimed in ire--"An it
were not for the presence of the venerable Lord Abbot, thou knave--"

"Nay, an thou wouldst try conclusions," said Christie of the Clinthill,
"I will meet thee at day-break by Saint Mary's Well."

"Hardened wretch!" said Father Eustace, "art thou but this instant
delivered from death, and dost thou so soon morse thoughts of
slaughter?"

"I will meet with thee ere it be long, thou knave," said the bailie,
"and teach thee thine Oremus."

"I will meet thy cattle in a moonlight night before that day," said he
of the Clinthill.

"I will have thee by the neck one misty morning, thou strong thief,"
answered the secular officer of the Church.

"Thou art thyself as strong a thief as ever rode," retorted Christie;
"and if the worms were once feasting on that fat carcass of thine I
might well hope to have thine office, by favour of these reverend
men."

"A cast of their office, and a cast of mine," answered the bailie; "a
cord and a confessor, that is all thou wilt have from us."

"Sirs," said the Sub-Prior, observing that his brethren began to take
more interest than was exactly decorous in this wrangling betwixt
justice and iniquity, "I pray you both to depart--Master Bailie,
retire with your halberdiers, and trouble not the man whom we have
dismissed.--And thou, Christie, or whatever be thy name, take thy
departure, and remember thou owest thy life to the Lord Abbot's
clemency."

"Nay, as to that," answered Christie, "I judge that I owe it to your
own; but impute it to whom ye list, I owe a life among ye, and there is
an end." And whistling as he went, he left the apartment, seeming as if
he held the life which he had forfeited not worthy further thanks.

"Obstinate even to brutality!" said Father Eustace; "and yet who
knows but some better ore may lie under so rude an exterior?"

"Save a thief from the gallows," said the Sacristan--"you know the rest
of the proverb; and admitting, as may Heaven grant, that our lives and
limbs are safe from this outrageous knave, who shall insure our meal and
our malt, our herds and our flocks?"

"Marry, that will I, my brethren," said an aged monk. "Ah, brethren,
you little know what may be made of a repentant robber. In Abbot
Ingilram's days--ay, and I remember them as it were yesterday--the
freebooters were the best welcome men that came to Saint Mary's. Ay,
they paid tithe of every drove that they brought over from the South,
and because they were something lightly come by, I have known them
make the tithe a seventh--that is, if their confessor knew his
business--ay, when we saw from the tower a score of fat bullocks, or a
drove of sheep, coming down the valley, with two or three stout
men-at-arms behind them with their glittering steel caps, and their
black-jacks, and their long lances, the good Lord Abbot Ingilram was
wont to say--he was a merry man--there come the tithes of the spoilers
of the Egyptians! Ay, and I have seen the famous John the Armstrang--a
fair man he was and a goodly, the more pity that hemp was ever heckled
for him--I have seen him come into the Abbey-church with nine tassels
of gold in his bonnet, and every tassel made of nine English nobles,
and he would go from chapel to chapel, and from image to image, and
from altar to altar, on his knees--and leave here a tassel, and there
a noble, till there was as little gold on his bonnet as on my
hood--you will find no such Border thieves now!"

"No, truly, Brother Nicolas," answered the Abbot; "they are more apt
to take any gold the Church has left, than to bequeath or bestow
any--and for cattle, beshrew me if I think they care whether beeves
have fed on the meadows of Lanercost Abbey or of Saint Mary's!"

"There is no good thing left in them," said Father Nicolas; "they are
clean naught--Ah, the thieves that I have seen!--such proper men! and
as pitiful as proper, and as pious as pitiful!"

"It skills not talking of it, Brother Nicolas," said the Abbot; "and I
will now dismiss you, my brethren, holding your meeting upon this our
inquisition concerning the danger of our reverend Sub-Prior, instead
of the attendance on the lauds this evening--Yet let the bells be duly
rung for the edification of the laymen without, and also that the
novices may give due reverence.--And now, benedicite, brethren! The
cellarer will bestow on each a grace-cup and a morsel as ye pass the
buttery, for ye have been turmoiled and anxious, and dangerous it is
to fall asleep in such case with empty stomach."

"_Gratias agimus quam maximas, Domine reverendissime_," replied the
brethren, departing in their due order.

But the Sub-Prior remained behind, and falling on his knees before the
Abbot, as he was about to withdraw, craved him to hear under the seal
of confession the adventures of the day. The reverend Lord Abbot
yawned, and would have alleged fatigue; but to Father Eustace, of all
men, he was ashamed to show indifference in his religious duties. The
confession, therefore, proceeded, in which Father Eustace told all the
extraordinary circumstances which had befallen him during the journey.
And being questioned by the Abbot, whether he was not conscious of any
secret sin, through which he might have been subjected for a time to
the delusions of evil spirits, the Sub-Prior admitted, with frank
avowal, that he thought he might have deserved such penance for having
judged with unfraternal rigour of the report of Father Philip the
Sacristan.

"Heaven," said the penitent, "may have been willing to convince me,
not only that he can at pleasure open a communication betwixt us and
beings of a different, and, as we word it, supernatural class, but
also to punish our pride of superior wisdom, or superior courage, or
superior learning."

It is well said that virtue is its own reward; and I question if duty
was ever more completely recompensed, than by the audience which the
reverend Abbot so unwillingly yielded to the confession of the
Sub-Prior. To find the object of his fear shall we say, or of his
envy, or of both, accusing himself of the very error with which he had
so tacitly charged him, was a corroboration of the Abbot's judgment, a
soothing of his pride, and an allaying of his fears. The sense of
triumph, however, rather increased than diminished his natural
good-humour; and so far was Abbot Boniface from being disposed to
tyrannize over his Sub-Prior in consequence of this discovery, that in
his exhortation he hovered somewhat ludicrously betwixt the natural
expression of his own gratified vanity, and his timid reluctance to
hurt the feelings of Father Eustace.

"My brother," said he, _ex cathedra_, "it cannot have escaped
your judicious observation, that we have often declined our own
judgment in favour of your opinion, even about those matters which
most nearly concerned the community. Nevertheless, grieved would we
be, could you think that we did this, either because we deemed our own
opinion less pregnant, or our wit more shallow, than that of our
brethren. For it was done exclusively to give our younger brethren,
such as your much esteemed self, my dearest brother, that courage
which is necessary to a free deliverance of your opinion,--we ofttimes
setting apart our proper judgment, that our inferiors, and especially
our dear brother the Sub-Prior, may be comforted and encouraged in
proposing valiantly his own thoughts.  Which our deference and
humility may, in some sort, have produced in your mind, most reverend
brother, that self-opinion of parts and knowledge, which hath led
unfortunately to your over-estimating your own faculties, and thereby
subjecting yourself, as is but too visible, to the japes and mockeries
of evil spirits.  For it is assured that Heaven always holdeth us in
the least esteem when we deem of ourselves most highly, and also, on
the other hand, it may be that we have somewhat departed from what
became our high seat in this Abbey, in suffering ourselves to be too
much guided, and even, as it were, controlled, by the voice of our
inferior. Wherefore," continued the Lord Abbot, "in both of us such
faults shall and must be amended--you hereafter presuming less upon
your gifts and carnal wisdom, and I taking heed not so easily to
relinquish mine own opinion for that of one lower in place and in
office. Nevertheless, we would not that we should thereby lose the
high advantage which we have derived, and may yet derive, from your
wise counsels, which hath been so often recommended to us by our most
reverend Primate. Wherefore, on affairs of high moment, we will call
you to our presence in private, and listen to your opinion, which, if
it shall agree with our own, we will deliver to the Chapter as
emanating directly from ourselves; thus sparing you, dearest brother,
that seeming victory which is so apt to engender spiritual pride, and
avoiding ourselves the temptation of falling into that modest facility
of opinion, whereby our office is lessened and our person (were that
of consequence) rendered less important in the eyes of the community
over which we preside."

Notwithstanding the high notions which, as a rigid Catholic, Father
Eustace entertained of the sacrament of confession, as his Church
calls it, there was some danger that a sense of the ridiculous might
have stolen on him, when he heard his Superior, with such simple
cunning, lay out a little plan for availing himself of the Sub-Prior's
wisdom and experience, while he should take the whole credit to
himself. Yet his conscience immediately told him he was right.

"I should have thought more," he reflected, "of the spiritual
Superior, and less of the individual. I should have spread my mantle
over the frailties of my spiritual father, and done what I might to
support his character, and, of course, to extend his utility among the
brethren, as well as with others. The Abbot cannot be humbled, but
what the community must be humbled in his person. Her boast is, that
over all her children, especially over those called to places of
distinction, she can diffuse those gifts which are necessary to render
them illustrious."

Actuated by these sentiments, Father Eustace frankly assented to the
charge which his Superior, even in that moment of authority, had
rather intimated than made, and signified his humble acquiescence in
any mode of communicating his counsel which might be most agreeable to
the Lord Abbot, and might best remove from himself all temptation to
glory in his own wisdom. He then prayed the reverend Father to assign
him such penance as might best suit his offence, intimating, at the
same time, that he had already fasted the whole day.

"And it is that I complain of," answered the Abbot, instead of giving
him credit for his abstinence; "it is these very penances, fasts, and
vigils, of which we complain; as tending only to generate airs and
fumes of vanity, which, ascending from the stomach into the head, do
but puff us up with vain-glory and self-opinion. It is meet and
beseeming that novices should undergo fasts and vigils; for some part
of every community must fast, and young stomachs may best endure it.
Besides, in them it abates wicked thoughts, and the desire of worldly
delights. But, reverend brother, for those to fast who are dead and
mortified to the world, as I and thou, is work of supererogation, and
is but the matter of spiritual pride. Wherefore, I enjoin thee, most
reverend brother, go to the buttery and drink two cups at least of
good wine, eating withal a comfortable morsel, such as may best suit
thy taste and stomach. And in respect that thine opinion of thy own
wisdom hath at times made thee less conformable to, and companionable
with, the weaker and less learned brethren, I enjoin thee, during the
said repast, to choose for thy companion, our reverend brother
Nicolas, and without interruption or impatience, to listen for a
stricken hour to his narration, concerning those things which befel in
the times of our venerable predecessor, Abbot Ingilram, on whose soul
may Heaven have mercy! And for such holy exercises as may farther
advantage your soul, and expiate the faults whereof you have
contritely and humbly avowed yourself guilty, we will ponder upon that
matter, and announce our will unto you the next morning."

It was remarkable, that after this memorable evening, the feelings of
the worthy Abbot towards his adviser were much more kindly and
friendly than when he deemed the Sub-Prior the impeccable and
infallible person, in whose garment of virtue and wisdom no flaw was
to be discerned. It seemed as if this avowal of his own imperfections
had recommended Father Eustace to the friendship of the Superior,
although at the same time this increase of benevolence was attended
with some circumstances, which, to a man of the Sub-Prior's natural
elevation of mind and temper, were more grievous than even undergoing
the legends of the dull and verbose Father Nicolas. For instance, the
Abbot seldom mentioned him to the other monks, without designing him
our beloved Brother Eustace, poor man!--and now and then he used to
warn the younger brethren against the snares of vainglory and
spiritual pride, which Satan sets for the more rigidly righteous, with
such looks and demonstrations as did all but expressly designate the
Sub-Prior as one who had fallen at one time under such delusions. Upon
these occasions, it required all the votive obedience of a monk, all
the philosophical discipline of the schools, and all the patience of a
Christian, to enable Father Eustace to endure the pompous and
patronizing parade of his honest, but somewhat thick-headed Superior.
He began himself to be desirous of leaving the Monastery, or at least
he manifestly declined to interfere with its affairs, in that marked
and authoritative manner, which he had at first practised.


       *       *       *       *       *

Chapter the Eleventh.


    You call this education, do you not?
    Why 'tis the forced march of a herd of bullocks
    Before a shouting drover. The glad van
    Move on at ease, and pause a while to snatch
    A passing morsel from the dewy greensward,
    While all the blows, the oaths, the indignation,
    Fall on the croupe of the ill-fated laggard
    That cripples in the rear.
                                          OLD PLAY.

Two or three years glided on, during which the storm of the
approaching alteration in church government became each day louder and
more perilous. Owing to the circumstances which we have intimated in
the end of the last chapter, the Sub-Prior Eustace appeared to have
altered considerably his habits of life. He afforded, on all
extraordinary occasions, to the Abbot, whether privately, or in the
assembled Chapter, the support of his wisdom and experience; but in
his ordinary habits he seemed now to live more for himself, and less
for the community, than had been his former practice.

He often absented himself for whole days from the convent; and as the
adventure of Glendearg dwelt deeply on his memory, he was repeatedly
induced to visit that lonely tower, and to take an interest in the
orphans who had their shelter under its roof. Besides, he felt a deep
anxiety to know whether the volume which he had lost, when so
strangely preserved from the lance of the murderer, had again found
its way back to the Tower of Glendearg. "It was strange," he thought,
"that a spirit," for such he could not help judging the being whose
voice he had heard, "should, on the one side, seek the advancement of
heresy, and, on the other, interpose to save the life of a zealous
Catholic priest."

But from no inquiry which he made of the various inhabitants of the
Tower of Glendearg could he learn that the copy of the translated
Scriptures, for which he made such diligent inquiry, had again been
seen by any of them.

In the meanwhile, the good father's occasional visits were of no small
consequence to Edward Glendinning and to Mary Avenel. The former
displayed a power of apprehending and retaining whatever was taught
him, which tilled Father Eustace with admiration. He was at once acute
and industrious, alert and accurate; one of those rare combinations of
talent and industry, which are seldom united.

It was the earnest desire of Father Eustace that the excellent
qualities thus early displayed by Edward should be dedicated to the
service of the Church, to which he thought the youth's own consent
might be easily obtained, as he was of a calm, contemplative, retired
habit, and seemed to consider knowledge as the principal object, and
its enlargement as the greatest pleasure, in life. As to the mother,
the Sub-Prior had little doubt that, trained as she was to view the
monks of Saint Mary's with such profound reverence, she would be but
too happy in an opportunity of enrolling one of her sons in its
honoured community. But the good Father proved to be mistaken in both
these particulars.

When he spoke to Elspeth Glendinning of that which a mother best loves
to hear--the proficiency and abilities of her son--she listened with a
delighted ear. But when Father Eustace hinted at the duty of
dedicating to the service of the Church, talents which seemed fitted
to defend and adorn it, the dame endeavoured always to shift the
subject; and when pressed farther, enlarged on her own incapacity, as
a lone woman, to manage the feu; on the advantage which her neighbours
of the township were often taking of her unprotected state, and on the
wish she had that Edward might fill his father's place, remain in the
tower, and close her eyes.

On such occasions the Sub-Prior would answer, that even in a worldly
point of view the welfare of the family would be best consulted by one
of the sons entering into the community of Saint Mary's, as it was not
to be supposed that he would fail to afford his family the important
protection which he could then easily extend towards them. What could
be a more pleasing prospect than to see him high in honour? or what
more sweet than to have the last duties rendered to her by a son,
reverend for his holiness of life and exemplary manners? Besides, he
endeavoured to impress upon the dame, that her eldest son, Halbert,
whose bold temper and headstrong indulgence of a wandering humour,
rendered him incapable of learning, was, for that reason, as well as
that he was her eldest born, fittest to bustle through the affairs of
the world, and manage the little fief.

Elspeth durst not directly dissent from what was proposed, for fear of
giving displeasure, and yet she always had something to say against it.
Halbert, she said, was not like any of the neighbour boys--he was
taller by the head, and stronger by the half, than any boy of his
years within the Halidome. But he was fit for no peaceful work that
could be devised.  If he liked a book ill, he liked a plough or a
pattle worse. He had scoured his father's old broadsword--suspended it
by a belt round his waist, and seldom stirred without it. He was a
sweet boy and a gentle if spoken fair, but cross him and he was a born
devil. "In a word," she said, bursting into tears, "deprive me of
Edward, good father, and ye bereave my house of prop and pillar; for
my heart tells me that Halbert will take to his father's gates, and
die his father's death."

When the conversation came to this crisis, the good-humoured monk was
always content to drop the discussion for the time, trusting some
opportunity would occur of removing her prejudices, for such he
thought them, against Edward's proposed destination.

When, leaving the mother, the Sub-Prior addressed himself to the son,
animating his zeal for knowledge, and pointing out how amply it might
be gratified should he agree to take holy orders, he found the same
repugnance which Dame Elspeth had exhibited. Edward pleaded a want of
sufficient vocation to so serious a profession--his reluctance to
leave his mother, and other objections, which the Sub-Prior treated as
evasive.

"I plainly perceive," he said one day, in answer to them, "that the
devil has his factors as well as Heaven, and that they are equally,
or, alas! the former are perhaps more active, in bespeaking for their
master the first of the market. I trust, young man, that neither
idleness, nor licentious pleasure, nor the love of worldly gain and
worldly grandeur, the chief baits with which the great Fisher of souls
conceals his hook, are the causes of your declining the career to
which I would incite you. But above all I trust--above all I
hope--that the vanity of superior knowledge--a sin with which those
who have made proficiency in learning are most frequently beset--has
not led you into the awful hazard of listening to the dangerous
doctrines which are now afloat concerning religion. Better for you
that you were as grossly ignorant as the beasts which perish, that
that the pride of knowledge should induce you to lend an ear to the
voice of heretics." Edward Glendinning listened to the rebuke with a
downcast look, and failed not, when it was concluded, earnestly to
vindicate himself from the charge of having pushed his studies into
any subjects which the Church inhibited; and so the monk was left to
form vain conjectures respecting the cause of his reluctance to
embrace the monastic state.

It is an old proverb, used by Chaucer, and quoted by Elizabeth, that
"the greatest clerks are not the wisest men;" and it is as true as if
the poet had not rhymed, or the queen reasoned on it. If Father
Eustace had not had his thoughts turned so much to the progress of
heresy, and so little to what was passing in the tower, he might have
read, in the speaking eyes of Mary Avenel, now a girl of fourteen or
fifteen, reasons which might disincline her youthful companion towards
the monastic vows. I have said, that she also was a promising pupil of
the good father, upon whom her innocent and infantine beauty had an
effect of which he was himself, perhaps, unconscious. Her rank and
expectations entitled her to be taught the arts of reading and
writing;--and each lesson which the monk assigned her was conned over
in company with Edward, and by him explained and re-explained, and
again illustrated, until she became perfectly mistress of it.

In the beginning of their studies, Halbert had been their school
companion.  But the boldness and impatience of his disposition soon
quarrelled with an occupation in which, without assiduity and
unremitted attention, no progress was to be expected. The Sub-Prior's
visits were at regular intervals, and often weeks would intervene
between them, in which case Halbert was sure to forget all that had
been prescribed for him to learn, and much which he had partly
acquired before. His deficiencies on these occasions gave him pain,
but it was not of that sort which produces amendment.

For a time, like all who are fond of idleness, he endeavoured to
detach the attention of his brother and Mary Avenel from their task,
rather than to learn his own, and such dialogues as the following
would ensue:

"Take your bonnet, Edward, and make haste--the Laird of Colmslie is
at the head of the glen with his hounds."

"I care not, Halbert," answered the younger brother; "two brace of dogs
may kill a deer without my being there to see them, and I must help Mary
Avenel with her lesson."

"Ay! you will labour at the monk's lessons till you turn monk yourself,"
answered Halbert.--"Mary, will you go with me, and I will show you the
cushat's nest I told you of?"

"I cannot go with you, Halbert," answered Mary, "because I must study
this lesson--it will take me long to learn it--I am sorry I am so
dull, for if I could get my task as fast as Edward, I should like to
go with you."

"Should you indeed?" said Halbert; "then I will wait for you--and,
what is more, I will try to get my lesson also."

With a smile and a sigh he took up the primer, and began heavily to
con over the task which had been assigned him. As if banished from the
society of the two others, he sat sad and solitary in one of the deep
window-recesses, and after in vain struggling with the difficulties of
his task, and his disinclination to learn it, he found himself
involuntarily engaged in watching the movements of the other two
students, instead of toiling any longer.

The picture which Halbert looked upon was delightful in itself, but
somehow or other it afforded very little pleasure to him. The
beautiful girl, with looks of simple, yet earnest anxiety, was bent on
disentangling those intricacies which obstructed her progress to
knowledge, and looking ever and anon to Edward for assistance, while,
seated close by her side, and watchful to remove every obstacle from
her way, he seemed at once to be proud of the progress which his pupil
made, and of the assistance which he was able to render her. There was
a bond betwixt them, a strong and interesting tie, the desire of
obtaining knowledge, the pride of surmounting difficulties.

Feeling most acutely, yet ignorant of the nature and source of his own
emotions, Halbert could no longer endure to look upon this quiet
scene, but, starting up, dashed his book from him, and exclaimed
aloud, "To the fiend I bequeath all books, and the dreamers that make
them!--I would a score of Southrons would come up the glen, and we
should learn how little all this muttering and scribbling is worth."

Mary Avenol and his brother started, and looked at Halbert with
surprise, while he went on with great animation, his features
swelling, and the tears starting into his eyes as he spoke.--"Yes,
Mary--I wish a score of Southrons came up the glen this very day; and
you should see one good hand, and one good sword, do more to protect
you, than all the books that were ever opened, and all the pens that
ever grew on a goose's wing."

Mary looked a little surprised and a little frightened at his
vehemence, but instantly replied affectionately, "You are vexed,
Halbert, because you do not get your lesson so fast as Edward can; and
so am I, for I am as stupid as you--But come, and Edward shall sit
betwixt us and teach us."

"He shall not teach _me_," said Halbert, in the same angry mood;
"I never can teach _him_ to do any thing that is honourable and
manly, and he shall not teach _me_ any of his monkish tricks.--I
hate the monks, with their drawling nasal tone like so many frogs, and
their long black petticoats like so many women, and their reverences,
and their lordships, and their lazy vassals that do nothing but peddle
in the mire with plough and harrow from Yule to Michaelmas. I will
call none lord, but him who wears a sword to make his title good; and
I will call none man, but he that can bear himself manlike and
masterful."

"For Heaven's sake, peace, brother!" said Edward; "if such words were
taken up and reported out of the house, they would be our mother's
ruin."

"Report them yourself, then, and they will be _your_ making, and
nobody's marring save mine own. Say that Halbert Glendinning will
never be vassal to an old man with a cowl and shaven crown, while
there are twenty barons who wear casque and plume that lack bold
followers. Let them grant you these wretched acres, and much meal may
they bear you to make your _brachan_." He left the room hastily,
but instantly returned, and continued to speak with the same tone of
quick and irritated feeling. "And you need not think so much, neither
of you, and especially you, Edward, need not think so much of your
parchment book there, and your cunning in reading it. By my faith, I
will soon learn to read as well as you; and--for I know a better
teacher than your grim old monk, and a better book than his printed
breviary; and since you like scholarcraft so well, Mary Avenel, you
shall see whether Edward or I have most of it." He left the apartment,
and came not again.

"What can be the matter with him?" said Mary, following Halbert with
her eyes from the window, as with hasty and unequal steps he ran up the
wild glen--"Where can your brother be going, Edward?--what book?--
what teacher does he talk of?"

"It avails not guessing," said Edward. "Halbert is angry, he knows not
why, and speaks of he knows not what; let us go again to our lessons,
and he will come home when he has tired himself with scrambling among
the crags as usual."

But Mary's anxiety on account of Halbert seemed more deeply rooted.
She declined prosecuting the task in which they had been so pleasingly
engaged, under the excuse of a headache; nor could Edward prevail upon
her to resume it again that morning.

Meanwhile Halbert, his head unbonneted, his features swelled with
jealous anger, and the tear still in his eye, sped up the wild and
upper extremity of the little valley of Glendearg with the speed of a
roebuck, choosing, as if in desperate defiance of the difficulties of
the way, the wildest and most dangerous paths, and voluntarily
exposing himself a hundred times to dangers which he might have
escaped by turning a little aside from them.  It seemed as if he
wished his course to be as straight as that of the arrow to its mark.

He arrived at length in a narrow and secluded _cleuch_, or deep
ravine, which ran down into the valley, and contributed a scanty
rivulet to the supply of the brook with which Glendearg is watered. Up
this he sped with the same precipitate haste which had marked his
departure from the tower, nor did he pause and look around until he
had reached the fountain from which the rivulet had its rise.

Here Halbert stopt short, and cast a gloomy, and almost a frightened
glance around him. A huge rock rose in front, from a cleft of which
grew a wild holly-tree, whose dark green branches rustled over the
spring which arose beneath. The banks on either hand rose so high, and
approached each other so closely, that it was only when the sun was at
its meridian height, and during the summer solstice, that its rays
could reach the bottom of the chasm in which he stood. But it was now
summer, and the hour was noon, so that the unwonted reflection of the
sun was dancing in the pellucid fountain.

"It is the season and the hour," said Halbert to himself; "and now
I--I might soon become wiser than Edward with all his pains! Mary
should see whether he alone is fit to be consulted, and to sit by her
side, and hang over her as she reads, and point out every word and
every letter.  And she loves me better than him--I am sure she
does--for she comes of noble blood, and scorns sloth and
cowardice.--And do I myself not stand here slothful and cowardly as
any priest of them all?--Why should I fear to call upon this
form--this shape?--Already have I endured the vision, and why not
again? What can it do to me, who am a man of lith and limb, and have
by my side my father's sword? Does my heart beat--do my hairs bristle,
at the thought of calling up a painted shadow, and how should I face a
band of Southrons in flesh and blood? By the soul of the first
Glendinning, I will make proof of the charm!"

He cast the leathern brogue or buskin from his right foot, planted
himself in a firm posture, unsheathed his sword, and first looking
around to collect his resolution, he bowed three times deliberately
towards the holly-tree, and as often to the little fountain, repeating
at the same time, with a determined voice, the following rhyme:

  "Thrice to the holly brake--
  Thrice to the well:--
  I bid thee awake,
  White Maid of Avenel!

  "Noon gleams on the Lake--
  Noon glows on the Fell--
  Wake thee, O wake,
  White Maid of Avenel!"

These lines were hardly uttered, when there stood the figure of a female
clothed in white, within three steps of Halbert Glendinning.

  "I guess'twas frightful there to see
  A lady richly clad as she--
  Beautiful exceedingly." [Footnote: Coleridge's Christabelle.]

       *       *       *       *      *



Chapter the Twelfth.


  There's something in that ancient superstition,
  Which, erring as it is, our fancy loves.
  The spring that, with its thousand crystal bubbles,
  Bursts from the bosom of some desert rock
  In secret solitude, may well be deem'd
  The haunt of something purer, more refined,
  And mightier than ourselves.
              OLD PLAY.

Young Halbert Glendinning had scarcely pronounced the mystical rhymes,
than, as we have mentioned in the conclusion of the last chapter, an
appearance, as of a beautiful female, dressed in white, stood within
two yards of him. His terror for the moment overcame his natural
courage, as well as the strong resolution which he had formed, that
the figure which he had now twice seen should not a third time daunt
him. But it would seem there is something thrilling and abhorrent to
flesh and blood, in the consciousness that we stand in presence of a
being in form like to ourselves, but so different in faculties and
nature, that we can neither understand its purposes, nor calculate its
means of pursuing them.

Halbert stood silent and gasped for breath, his hairs erecting
themselves on his head---his mouth open--his eyes fixed, and, as the
sole remaining sign of his late determined purpose, his sword pointed
towards the apparition.  At length with a voice of ineffable
sweetness, the White Lady, for by that name we shall distinguish this
being, sung, or rather chanted, the following lines:--

  "Youth of the dark eye, wherefore didst thou call me?
  Wherefore art thou here, if terrors can appal thee?
  He that seeks to deal with us must know no fear nor failing!
  To coward and churl our speech is dark, our gifts are unavailing.
  The breeze that brought me hither now, must sweep Egyptian ground,
  The fleecy cloud on which I ride for Araby is bound;
  The fleecy cloud is drifting by, the breeze sighs for my stay,
  For I must sail a thousand miles before the close of day."

The astonishment of Halbert began once more to give way to his
resolution, and he gained voice enough to say, though with a faltering
accent, "In the name of God, what art thou?" The answer was in melody
of a different tone and measure:--

  "What I am I must not show--
  What I am thou couldst not know--
  Something betwixt heaven and hell--
  Something that neither stood nor fell--
  Something that through thy wit or will
  May work thee good--may work thee ill.
  Neither substance quite nor shadow,
  Haunting lonely moor and meadow,
  Dancing; by the haunted spring,
  Riding on the whirlwind's wing;
  Aping in fantastic fashion
  Every change of human passion,

  While o'er our frozen minds they pass,
  Like shadows from the mirror'd glass.
  Wayward, fickle is our mood,
  Hovering betwixt bad and good,
  Happier than brief-dated man,
  Living twenty times his span;
  Far less happy, for we have
  Help nor hope beyond the grave!
  Man awakes to joy or sorrow;
  Ours the sleep that knows no morrow.
  This is all that I can show--
  This is all that thou mayest know."

The White Lady paused, and appeared to await an answer; but, as Halbert
hesitated how to frame his speech, the vision seemed gradually to fade,
and became more and more incorporeal. Justly guessing this to be a
symptom of her disappearance, Halbert compelled himself to say,--"Lady,
when I saw you in the glen, and when you brought back the black book of
Mary Avenel, thou didst say I should one day learn to read it."

The White Lady replied,

  "Ay! and I taught thee the word and the spell,
  To waken me here by the Fairies' Well,
  But thou hast loved the heron and hawk,
  More than to seek my haunted walk;
  And thou hast loved the lance and the sword,
  More than good text and holy word;
  And thou hast loved the deer to track,
  More than the lines and the letters black;
  And thou art a ranger of moss and of wood,
  And scornest the nurture of gentle blood."

"I will do so no longer, fair maiden," said Halbert; "I desire to
learn; and thou didst promise me, that when I did so desire, thou
wouldst be my helper; I am no longer afraid of thy presence, and I am
no longer regardless of instruction." As he uttered these words, the
figure of the White Maiden grew gradually as distinct as it had been
at first; and what had well-nigh faded into an ill-defined and
colourless shadow, again assumed an appearance at least of corporeal
consistency, although the hues were less vivid, and the outline of the
figure less distinct and defined--so at least it seemed to
Halbert--than those of an ordinary inhabitant of earth. "Wilt thou
grant my request," he said, "fair Lady, and give to my keeping the
holy book which Mary of Avenel has so often wept for?"

The White Lady replied:

  "Thy craven fear my truth accused,
  Thine idlehood my trust abused;
  He that draws to harbour late,
  Must sleep without, or burst the gate.

  There is a star for thee which burn'd.
  Its influence wanes, its course is turn'd;
  Valour and constancy alone
  Can bring thee back the chance that's flown."

"If I have been a loiterer, Lady," answered young Glendinning, "thou
shalt now find me willing to press forward with double speed. Other
thoughts have filled my mind, other thoughts have engaged my heart,
within a brief period--and by Heaven, other occupations shall
henceforward fill up my time. I have lived in this day the space of
years--I came hither a boy--I will return a man--a man, such as may
converse not only with his own kind, but with whatever God permits to
be visible to him. I will learn the contents of that mysterious
volume--I will learn why the Lady of Avenel loved it--why the priests
feared, and would have stolen it--why thou didst twice recover it
from their hands.--What mystery is wrapt in it?--Speak, I conjure
thee!" The lady assumed an air peculiarly sad and solemn, as drooping
her head, and folding her arms on her bosom, she replied:

  "Within that awful volume lies
  The mystery of mysteries!
  Happiest they of human race,
  To whom God has granted grace

  To read, to fear, to hope, to pray,
  To lift the latch, and force the way;
  And better had they ne'er been born,
  Who read, to doubt, or read to scorn."

"Give me the volume, Lady," said young Glendinning. "They call me
idle--they call me dull--in this pursuit my industry shall not fail,
nor, with God's blessing, shall my understanding. Give me the volume."
The apparition again replied:

  "Many a fathom dark and deep
  I have laid the book to sleep;
  Ethereal fires around it glowing--
  Ethereal music ever flowing--
    The sacred pledge of Heav'n
      All things revere.
      Each in his sphere,
    Save man for whom 'twas giv'n:
  Lend thy hand, and thou shalt spy
  Things ne'er seen by mortal eye."

Halbert Glendinning boldly reached his hand to the White Lady.

"Fearest thou to go with me?" she said, as his hand trembled at the soft
and cold touch of her own--

  "Fearest thou to go with me?
  Still it is free to thee
    A peasant to dwell:
  Thou mayst drive the dull steer,
  And chase the king's deer,
  But never more come near
  This haunted well."

"If what thou sayest be true," said the undaunted boy, "my destinies
are higher than thine own. There shall be neither well nor wood which I
dare not visit. No fear of aught, natural or supernatural, shall bar my
path through my native valley."

He had scarce uttered the words, when they both descended through the
earth with a rapidity which took away Halbert's breath and every other
sensation, saving that of being hurried on with the utmost velocity. At
length they stopped with a shock so sudden, that the mortal journeyer
through this unknown space must have been thrown down with violence,
had he not been upheld by his supernatural companion.

It was more than a minute, ere, looking around him, he beheld a
grotto, or natural cavern, composed of the most splendid spars and
crystals, which returned in a thousand prismatic hues the light of a
brilliant flame that glowed on an altar of alabaster. This altar, with
its fire, formed the central point of the grotto, which was of a round
form, and very high in the roof, resembling in some respects the dome
of a cathedral. Corresponding to the four points of the compass, there
went off four long galleries, or arcades, constructed of the same
brilliant materials with the dome itself, and the termination of which
was lost in darkness.

No human imagination can conceive, or words suffice to describe, the
glorious radiance which, shot fiercely forth by the flame, was
returned from so many hundred thousand points of reflection, afforded
by the sparry pillars and their numerous angular crystals. The fire
itself did not remain steady and unmoved, but rose and fell, sometimes
ascending in a brilliant pyramid of condensed flame half way up the
lofty expanse, and again fading into a softer and more rosy hue, and
hovering, as it were, on the surface of the altar to collect its
strength for another powerful exertion.  There was no visible fuel by
which it was fed, nor did it emit either smoke or vapour of any kind.

What was of all the most remarkable, the black volume so often
mentioned lay not only unconsumed, but untouched in the slightest
degree, amid this intensity of fire, which, while it seemed to be of
force sufficient to melt adamant, had no effect whatever on the sacred
book thus subjected to its utmost influence.

The White Lady, having paused long enough to let young Glendinning
take a complete survey of what was around him, now said in her usual
chant,

  "Here lies the volume thou boldly hast sought;
  Touch it, and take it,--'twill dearly be bought!"

Familiarized in some degree with marvels, and desperately desirous of
showing the courage he had boasted, Halbert plunged his hand, without
hesitation, into the flame, trusting to the rapidity of the motion, to
snatch out the volume before the fire could greatly affect him. But he
was much disappointed. The flame instantly caught upon his sleeve, and
though he withdrew his hand immediately, yet his arm was so dreadfully
scorched, that he had well-nigh screamed with pain. He suppressed the
natural expression of anguish, however, and only intimated the agony
which he felt by a contortion and a muttered groan. The White Lady
passed her cold hand over his arm, and, ere she had finished the
following metrical chant, his pain had entirely gone, and no mark of
the scorching was visible:

          "Rash thy deed,
          Mortal weed
    To immortal flames applying;
          Rasher trust
          Has thing of dust,
    On his own weak worth relying:
  Strip thee of such fences vain,
  Strip, and prove thy luck, again."

Obedient to what he understood to be the meaning of his conductress,
Halbert bared his arm to the shoulder, throwing down the remains of
his sleeve, which no sooner touched the floor on which he stood than
it collected itself together, shrivelled itself up, and was without
any visible fire reduced to light tinder, which a sudden breath of
wind dispersed into empty space. The White Lady, observing the
surprise of the youth, immediately repeated--

  "Mortal warp and mortal woof.
  Cannot brook this charmed roof;
  All that mortal art hath wrought,
  In our cell returns to nought.
  The molten gold returns to clay,
  The polish'd diamond melts away.
  All is alter'd, all is flown,
  Nought stands fast but truth alone.
  Not for that thy quest give o'er:
  Courage! prove thy chance once more."

Imboldened by her words, Halbert Glendinning made a second effort,
and, plunging his bare arm into the flame, took out the sacred volume
without feeling either heat or inconvenience of any kind. Astonished,
and almost terrified at his own success, he beheld the flame collect
itself, and shoot up into one long and final stream, which seemed as
if it would ascend to the very roof of the cavern, and then, sinking
as suddenly, became totally extinguished. The deepest darkness ensued;
but Halbert had no time to consider his situation, for the White Lady
had already caught his hand, and they ascended to upper air with the
same velocity with which they had sunk into the earth.

They stood by the fountain in the Corri-nan-shian when they emerged
from the bowels of the earth; but on casting a bewildered glance
around him, the youth was surprised to observe, that the shadows had
fallen far to the east, and that the day was well-nigh spent. He gazed
on his conductress for explanation, but her figure began to fade
before his eyes--her cheeks grew paler, her features less distinct,
her form became shadowy, and blended itself with the mist which was
ascending the hollow ravine.  What had late the symmetry of form, and
the delicate, yet clear hues of feminine beauty, now resembled the
flitting and pale ghost of some maiden who has died for love, as it is
seen indistinctly and by moonlight, by her perjured lover.

"Stay, spirit!" said the youth, imboldened by his success in the
subterranean dome, "thy kindness must not leave me, as one encumbered
with a weapon he knows not how to wield. Thou must teach me the art to
read, and to understand this volume; else what avails it me that I
possess it?"

But the figure of the White Lady still waned before his eye, until it
became an outline as pale and indistinct as that of the moon, when the
winter morning is far advanced, and ere she had ended the following
chant, she was entirely invisible:--

  "Alas! alas!
  Not ours the grace
  These holy characters to trace:
      Idle forms of painted air,
      Not to us is given to share
  The boon bestow'd on Adam's race!
      With patience bide.
      Heaven will provide
  The fitting time, the fitting guide."

The form was already gone, and now the voice itself had melted away in
melancholy cadence, softening, as if the Being who spoke had been slowly
wafted from the spot where she had commenced her melody.

It was at this moment that Halbert felt the extremity of the terror
which he had hitherto so manfully suppressed. The very necessity of
exertion had given him spirit to make it, and the presence of the
mysterious Being, while it was a subject of fear in itself, had
nevertheless given him the sense of protection being near to him. It
was when he could reflect with composure on what had passed, that a
cold tremor shot across his limbs, his hair bristled, and he was
afraid to look around lest he should find at his elbow something more
frightful than the first vision. A breeze arising suddenly, realized
the beautiful and wild idea of the most imaginative of our modern
bards [Footnote: Coleridge.]--

  It fann'd his cheek, it raised his hair,
    Like a meadow pale in spring;
  It mingled strangely with his fears,
    Yet it fell like a welcoming.

The youth stood silent and astonished for a few minutes. It seemed to
him that the extraordinary Being he had seen, half his terror, half
his protectress, was still hovering on the gale which swept past him,
and that she might again make herself sensible to his organs of sight.
"Speak!" he said, wildly tossing his arms, "speak yet again--be once
more present, lovely vision!--thrice have I now seen thee, yet the
idea of thy invisible presence around or beside me, makes my heart
beat faster than if the earth yawned and gave up a demon."

But neither sound nor appearance indicated the presence of the White
Lady, and nothing preternatural beyond what he had already witnessed,
was again audible or visible. Halbert, in the meanwhile, by the very
exertion of again inviting the presence of this mysterious Being, had
recovered his natural audacity. He looked around once more, and
resumed his solitary path down the valley into whose recesses he had
penetrated.

Nothing could be more strongly contrasted than the storm of passion
with which he had bounded over stock and crag, in order to plunge
himself into the Corri-nan-shian, and the sobered mood in which he now
returned homeward, industriously seeking out the most practicable
path, not from a wish to avoid danger, but that he might not by
personal toil distract his attention, deeply fixed on the
extraordinary scene which he had witnessed. In the former case, he had
sought by hazard and bodily exertion to indulge at once the fiery
excitation of passion, and to banish the cause of the excitement from
his recollection; while now he studiously avoided all interruption to
his contemplative walk, lest the difficulty of the way should
interfere with, or disturb, his own deep reflections. Thus slowly
pacing forth his course, with the air of a pilgrim rather than of a
deer-hunter, Halbert about the close of the evening regained his
paternal tower.




Chapter the Thirteenth.


  The Miller was of manly make,
    To meet him was na mows;
  There durst na ten come him to take,
    Sae noited he their pows.
            CHRIST'S KIRK ON THE GREEN.

It was after sunset, as we have already stated, when Halbert
Glendinning returned to the abode of his father. The hour of dinner
was at noon, and that of supper about an hour after sunset at this
period of the year.  The former had passed without Halbert's
appearing; but this was no uncommon circumstance, for the chase, or
any other pastime which occurred, made Halbert a frequent neglecter of
hours; and his mother, though angry and disappointed when she saw him
not at table, was so much accustomed to his occasional absence, and
knew so little how to teach him more regularity, that a testy
observation was almost all the censure with which such omissions were
visited.

On the present occasion, however, the wrath of good Dame Elspeth
soared higher than usual. It was not merely on account of the special
tup's head and trotters, the haggis and the side of mutton, with which
her table was set forth, but also because of the arrival of no less a
person than Hob Miller, as he was universally termed, though the man's
name was Happer.

The object of the Miller's visit to the Tower of Glendearg was like
the purpose of those embassies which potentates send to each other's
courts, partly ostensible, partly politic. In outward show, Hob came
to visit his friends of the Halidome, and share the festivity common
among country folk, after the barn-yard has been filled, and to renew
old intimacies by new conviviality. But in very truth he also came to
have an eye upon the contents of each stack, and to obtain such
information respecting the extent of the crop reaped and gathered in
by each feuar, as might prevent the possibility of _abstracted
multures_.

All the world knows that the cultivators of each barony or regality,
temporal or spiritual, in Scotland, are obliged to bring their corn to
be grinded at the mill of the territory, for which they pay a heavy
charge, called the _intown multures_. I could speak to the
thirlage of _invecta et illata_ too, but let that pass. I have
said enough to intimate that I talk not without book.  Those of the
_Sucken_, or enthralled ground, were liable in penalties, if,
deviating from this thirlage, (or thraldom,) they carried their grain
to another mill. Now such another mill, erected on the lands of a
lay-baron, lay within a tempting and convenient distance of Glendearg;
and the Miller was so obliging, and his charges so moderate, that it
required Hob Miller's utmost vigilance to prevent evasions of his
right of monopoly.

The most effectual means he could devise was this show of good
fellowship and neighbourly friendship,--under colour of which he made
his annual cruise through the barony--numbered every corn-stack, and
computed its contents by the boll, so that he could give a shrewd hint
afterwards whether or not the grist came to the right mill.

Dame Elspeth, like her compeers, was obliged to take these domiciliary
visits in the sense of politeness; but in her case they had not
occurred since her husband's death, probably because the Tower of
Glendearg was distant, and there was but a trifling quantity of arable
or _infield_ land attached to it. This year there had been, upon
some speculation of old Martin's, several bolls sown in the
exit-field, which, the season being fine, had ripened remarkably well.
Perhaps this circumstance occasioned the honest Miller's including
Glendearg, on this occasion, in his annual round Dame Glendinning
received with pleasure a visit which she used formerly only to endure
with patience; and she had changed her view of the matter chiefly, if
not entirely, because Hob had brought with him his daughter Mysie, of
whose features she could give so slight an account, but whose dress
she had described so accurately to the Sub-Prior.

Hitherto this girl had been an object of very trifling consideration
in the eyes of the good widow; but the Sub-Prior's particular and
somewhat mysterious inquiries had set her brains to work on the
subject of Mysie of the Mill; and she had here asked a broad question,
and there she had thrown out an innuendo, and there again she had
gradually led on to a conversation on the subject of poor Mysie. And
from all inquiries and investigations she had collected, that Mysie
was a dark-eyed, laughter-loving wench, with cherry-cheeks, and a skin
as white as her father's finest bolted flour, out of which was made
the Abbot's own wastel-bread. For her temper, she sung and laughed
from morning to night; and for her fortune, a material article,
besides that which the Miller might have amassed by means of his
proverbial golden thumb, Mysie was to inherit a good handsome lump of
land, with a prospect of the mill and mill-acres descending to her
husband on an easy lease, if a fair word were spoken in season to the
Abbot, and to the Prior, and to the Sub-Prior, and to the Sacristan,
and so forth.

By turning and again turning these advantages over in her own mind,
Elspeth at length came to be of opinion, that the only way to save her
son Halbert from a life of "spur, spear, and snaffle," as they called
that of the border-riders, from the dint of a cloth-yard shaft, or the
loop of an inch-cord, was, that he should marry and settle, and that
Mysie Happer should be his destined bride.

As if to her wish, Hob Miller arrived on his strong-built mare,
bearing on a pillion behind him the lovely Mysie, with cheeks like a
peony-rose, (if Dame Glendinning had ever seen one,) spirits all
afloat with rustic coquetry, and a profusion of hair as black as
ebony. The _beau-ideal_ which Dame Glendinning had been bodying
forth in her imagination, became unexpectedly realized in the buxom
form of Mysie Happer, whom, in the course of half an hour, she settled
upon as the maiden who was to fix the restless and untutored Halbert.
True, Mysie, as the dame soon saw, was like to love dancing round a
May-pole as well as managing a domestic establishment, and Halbert was
like to break more heads than he would grind stacks of corn. But then
a miller should always be of manly make, and has been described so
since the days of Chaucer and James I. [Footnote: The verse we have
chosen for a motto, is from a poem imputed to James I. of Scotland. As
for the Miller who figures among the Canterbury pilgrims, besides his
sword and buckler, he boasted other attributes, all of which, but
especially the last, show that he relied more on the strength of the
outside than that of the inside of his skull.

  The miller was a stout carl for the nones,
  Full big he was of brawn, and eke of bones;
  That proved well, for wheresoe'r he cam,
  At wrestling he wold bear away the ram;
  He was short shoulder'd, broad, a thick gnar;
  There n'as no door that he n'old heave of bar,
  Or break it at a running with his head, &c. ]

Indeed, to be able to outdo and bully the whole _Sucken_, (once
more we use this barbarous phrase,) in all athletic exercises, was one
way to render easy the collection of dues which men would have
disputed with a less formidable champion.  Then, as to the
deficiencies of the miller's wife, the dame was of opinion that they
might be supplied by the activity of the miller's mother. "I will keep
house for the young folk myself, for the tower is grown very lonely,"
thought Dame Glendinning, "and to live near the kirk will be mair
comfortable in my auld age--and then Edward may agree with his brother
about the feu, more especially as he is a favourite with the
Sub-Prior, and then he may live in the auld tower like his worthy
father before him--and wha kens but Mary Avenel, high-blood as she is,
may e'en draw in her stool to the chimney-nook, and sit down here for
good and a'?--It's true she has no tocher, but the like of her for
beauty and sense ne'er crossed my een; and I have kend every wench in
the Halidome of St.  Mary's--ay, and their mothers that bore them--ay,
she is a sweet and a lovely creature as ever tied snood over brown
hair--ay, and then, though her uncle keeps her out of her ain for the
present time, yet it is to be thought the gray-goose shaft will find a
hole in his coat of proof, as, God help us! it has done in many a
better man's--And, moreover, if they should stand on their pedigree
and gentle race, Edward might say to them, that is, to her gentle kith
and kin, 'whilk o' ye was her best friend, when she came down the glen
to Glendearg in a misty evening, on a beast mair like a cuddie than
aught else?'--And if they tax him with churl's blood, Edward might
say, that, forby the old proverb, how

  Gentle deed
  Makes gentle bleid;

yet, moreover, there comes no churl's blood from Glendinning or Brydone;
for, says Edward--"

The hoarse voice of the Miller at this moment recalled the dame from
her reverie, and compelled her to remember that if she meant to
realize her airy castle, she must begin by laying the foundation in
civility to her guest and his daughter, whom she was at that moment
most strangely neglecting, though her whole plan turned on
conciliating their favour and good opinion, and that, in fact, while
arranging matters for so intimate a union with her company, she was
suffering them to sit unnoticed, and in their riding gear, as if about
to resume their journey. "And so I say, dame," concluded the Miller,
(for she had not marked the beginning of his speech,) "an ye be so
busied with your housekep, or ought else, why, Mysie and I will trot
our way down the glen again to Johnnie Broxmouth's, who pressed us
right kindly to bide with him."

Starting at once from her dream of marriages and intermarriages,
mills, mill-lands, and baronies, Dame Elspeth felt for a moment like
the milk-maid in the fable, when she overset the pitcher, on the
contents of which so many golden dreams were founded. But the
foundation of Dame Glendinning's hopes was only tottering, not
overthrown, and she hastened to restore its equilibrium. Instead of
attempting to account for her absence of mind and want of attention to
her guests, which she might have found something difficult, she
assumed the offensive, like an able general when he finds it
necessary, by a bold attack, to disguise his weakness.

A loud exclamation she made, and a passionate complaint she set up
against the unkindness of her old friend, who could for an instant
doubt the heartiness of her welcome to him and to his hopeful
daughter; and then to think of his going back to Johnny Broxmouth's,
when the auld tower stood where it did, and had room in it for a
friend or two in the worst of times--and he too a neighbour that his
umquhile gossip Simon, blessed be his cast, used to think the best
friend he had in the Halidome! And on she went, urging her complaint
with so much seriousness, that she had well-nigh imposed on herself as
well as upon Hob Miller, who had no mind to take any thing in dudgeon;
and as it suited his plans to pass the night at Glendearg, would have
been equally contented to do so even had his reception been less
vehemently hospitable.

To all Elspeth's expostulations on the unkindness of his proposal to
leave her dwelling, he answered composedly, "Nay, dame, what could I
tell? ye might have had other grist to grind, for ye looked as if ye
scarce saw us--or what know I? ye might bear in mind the words Martin
and I had about the last barley ye sawed--for I ken dry multures
[Footnote: Dry multures were a fine, or compensation in money, for not
grinding at the mill of the thirl. It was, and is, accounted a
vexatious exaction.] will sometimes stick in the throat. A man seeks
but his awn, and yet folk shall hold him for both miller and miller's
man, that is millar and knave, [Footnote: The under miller is, in the
language of thirlage, called the knave, which, indeed, signified
originally his lad. (_Knabe_--German,) but by degrees came to be
taken in a worse sense. In the old translation of the Bible, Paul is
made to term himself the knave of our Saviour. The allowance of meal
taken by the miller's servant was called knave-ship.] all the country
over."

"Alas, that you will say so, neighbour Hob," said Dame Elspeth, "or
that Martin should have had any words with you about the mill-dues! I
will chide him roundly for it, I promise you, on the faith of a true
widow.  You know full well that a lone woman is sore put upon by her
servants."

"Nay, dame," said the miller, unbuckling the broad belt which made
fast his cloak, and served, at the same time, to suspend by his side a
swinging Andrea Ferrara, "bear no grudge at Martin, for I bear none--I
take it on me as a thing of mine office, to maintain my right of
multure, lock, and gowpen.  [Note: The multure was the regular
exaction for grinding the meal. The _lock_, signifying a small
quantity, and the _gowpen_, a handful, were additional
perquisites demanded by the miller, and submitted to or resisted by
the _Suckener_ as circumstances permitted. These and other petty
dues were called in general the _Sequels_.] And reason good, for
as the old song says,

  I live by my mill. God bless her,
   She's parent, child, and wife.

The poor old slut, I am beholden to her for my living, and bound to
stand by her, as I say to my mill knaves, in right and in wrong. And
so should every honest fellow stand by his bread-winner.--And so,
Mysie, ye may doff your cloak since our neighbour is so kindly glad to
see us--why, I think, we are as blithe to see her--not one in the
Halidome pays their multures more duly, sequels, arriage, and
carriage, and mill-services, used and wont."

With that the Miller hung his ample cloak without farther ceremony
upon a huge pair of stag's antlers, which adorned at once the naked
walls of the tower, and served for what we vulgarly call cloak-pins.

In the meantime Dame Elspeth assisted to disembarrass the damsel whom
she destined for her future daughter-in-law, of her hood, mantle, and
the rest of her riding gear, giving her to appear as beseemed the
buxom daughter of the wealthy Miller, gay and goodly, in a white
kirtle, the seams of which were embroidered with green silken lace or
fringe, entwined with some silver thread. An anxious glance did
Elspoth cast upon the good-humoured face, which was now more fully
shown to her, and was only obscured by a quantity of raven black hair,
which the maid of the mill had restrained by a snood of green silk,
embroidered with silver, corresponding to the trimmings of her kirtle.
The countenance itself was exceedingly comely--the eyes black, large,
and roguishly good-humoured--the mouth was small--the lips well
formed, though somewhat full--the teeth were pearly white--and the
chin had a very seducing dimple in it. The form belonging to this
joyous face was full and round, and firm and fair. It might become
coarse and masculine some years hence, which is the common fault of
Scottish beauty; but in Mysie's sixteenth year she had the shape of a
Hebe. The anxious Elspeth, with all her maternal partiality, could not
help admitting within herself, that a better man than Halbert might go
farther and fare worse.  She looked a little giddy, and Halbert was
not nineteen; still it was time he should be settled, for to that
point the dame always returned; and here was an excellent opportunity.

The simple cunning of Dame Elspeth now exhausted itself in
commendations of her fair guest, from the snood, as they say, to the
single-soled shoe.  Mysie listened and blushed with pleasure for the
first five minutes; but ere ten had elapsed, she began to view the old
lady's compliments rather as subjects of mirth than of vanity, and was
much more disposed to laugh at than to be flattered with them, for
Nature had mingled the good-humour with which she had endowed the
damsel with no small portion of shrewdness.  Even Hob himself began to
tire of hearing his daughter's praises, and broke in with, "Ay, ay,
she is a clever quean enough; and, were she five years older, she
shall lay a loaded sack on an _aver_ [Note: _Aver_--properly
a horse of labour.] with e'er a lass in the Halidome. But I have been
looking for your two sons, dame. Men say downby that Halbert's turned
a wild springald, and that we may have word of him from Westmoreland
one moonlight night or another."

"God forbid, my good neighbour; God, in his mercy, forbid!" said Dame
Glendinning, earnestly; for it was touching the very key-note of her
apprehensions, to hint any probability that Halbert might become one
of the marauders so common in the age and country. But, fearful of
having betrayed too much alarm on this subject, she immediately added,
"That though, since the last rout at Pinkiecleuch, she had been all of
a tremble when a gun or a spear was named, or when men spoke of
fighting; yet, thanks to God and our Lady, her sons were like to live
and die honest and peaceful tenants to the Abbey, as their father
might have done, but for that awful hosting which he went forth to
with mony a brave man that never returned."

"Ye need not tell me of it, dame," said the Miller, "since I was there
myself, and made two pair of legs (and these were not mine, but my
mare's,) worth one pair of hands. I judged how it would be, when I saw
our host break ranks, with rushing on through that broken ploughed
field, and so as they had made a pricker of me, I e'en pricked off
with myself while the play was good."

"Ay, ay, neighbour," said the dame, "ye were aye a wise and a wary
man; if my Simon had had your wit, he might have been here to speak
about it this day; but he was aye cracking of his good blood and his
high kindred, and less would not serve him than to bide the bang to
the last, with the earls, and knights, and squires, that had no wives
to greet for them, or else had wives that cared not how soon they were
widows; but that is not for the like of us. But touching my son
Halbert, there is no fear of him; for if it should be his misfortune
to be in the like case, he has the best pair of heels in Halidome, and
could run almost as fast as your mare herself."

"Is this he, neighbour?" quoth the Miller.

"No," replied the mother; "that is my youngest son, Edward, who can
read and write like the Lord Abbot himself, if it were not a sin to
say so."

"Ay," said the Miller; "and is that the young clerk the Sub-Prior
thinks so much of? they say he will come far ben that lad; wha kens
but he may come to be Sub-Prior himself?--as broken a ship has come to
land."

"To be a Prior, neighbour Miller," said Edward, "a man must first be
a priest, and for that I judge I have little vocation."

"He will take to the pleugh-pettle, neighbour," said the good dame;
"and so will Halbert too, I trust. I wish you saw Halbert.--Edward,
where is your brother?"

"Hunting, I think," replied Edward; "at least he left us this morning
to join the Laird of Colmslie and his hounds. I have heard them
baying in the glen all day."

"And if I had heard that music," said the Miller, "it would have done
my heart good, ay, and may be taken me two or three miles out of my
road.  When I was the Miller of Morebattle's knave, I have followed
the hounds from Eckford to the foot of Hounam-law--followed them on
foot, Dame Glendinning, ay, and led the chase when the Laird of
Cessford and his gay riders were all thrown out by the mosses and
gills. I brought the stag on my back to Hounam Cross, when the dogs
had pulled him down. I think I see the old gray knight, as he sate so
upright on his strong war-horse, all white with foam; and 'Miller,'
said he to me, 'an thou wilt turn thy back on the mill, and wend with
me, I will make a man of thee.' But I chose rather to abide by clap
and happer, and the better luck was mine; for the proud Percy caused
hang five of the Laird's henchmen at Alnwick for burning a rickle of
houses some gate beyond Fowberry, and it might have been my luck as
well as another man's."

"Ah, neighbour, neighbour," said Dame Glendinning, "you were aye wise
and wary; but if you like hunting, I must say Halbert's the lad to
please you. He hath all those fair holiday terms of hawk and hound as
ready in his mouth as Tom with the tod's tail, that is the Lord
Abbot's ranger."

"Ranges he not homeward at dinner-time, dame," demanded the Miller;
"for we call noon the dinner-hour at Kennaquhair?"

The widow was forced to admit that, even at this important period of
the day, Halbert was frequently absent; at which the Miller shook his
head, intimating, at the same time, some allusion to the proverb of
MacFarlane's geese, which "liked their play better than their
meat." [Footnote: A brood of wild-geese, which long frequented one of
the uppermost islands in Loch-Lomond, called Inch-Tavoe, were supposed
to have some mysterious connexion with the ancient family of
MacFarlane of that ilk, and it is said were never seen after the ruin
and extinction of that house. The MacFarlanes had a house and garden
upon that same island of Inch-Tavoe. Here James VI. was, on one
occasion, regaled by the chieftain. His Majesty had been previously
much amused by the geese pursuing each other on the Loch. But, when
one which was brought to table, was found to be tough and ill fed,
James observed--"that MacFarlane's geese liked their play better than
their meat," a proverb which has been current ever since.]

That the delay of dinner might not increase the Miller's disposition
to prejudge Halbert, Dame Glendinning called hastily on Mary Avenel to
take her task of entertaining Mysie Happer, while she herself rushed
to the kitchen, and, entering at once into the province of Tibb
Tacket, rummaged among trenchers and dishes, snatched pots from the
fire, and placed pans and gridirons on it, accompanying her own feats
of personal activity with such a continued list of injunctions to
Tibb, that Tibb at length lost patience, and said, "Here was as muckle
wark about meating an auld miller, as if they had been to banquet the
blood of Bruce." But this, as it was supposed to be spoken aside, Dame
Glendinning did not think it convenient to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Fourteenth.


  Nay, let me have the friends who eat my victuals,
  As various as my dishes.--The feast's naught,
  Where one huge plate predominates. John Plaintext,
  He shall be mighty beef, our English staple;
  The worthy Alderman, a butter'd dumpling;
  Yon pair of whisker'd Cornets, ruffs and rees:
  Their friend the Dandy, a green goose in sippets.
  And so the hoard is spread at once and fill'd
  On the same principle--Variety.
                           NEW PLAY.

"And what brave lass is this?" said Hob Miller, as Mary Avenel entered
the apartment to supply the absence of Dame Elspeth Glendinning.

"The young Lady of Avenel, father," said the Maid of the Mill,
dropping as low a curtsy as her rustic manners enabled her to make.
The Miller, her father, doffed his bonnet, and made his reverence, not
altogether so low perhaps as if the young lady had appeared in the
pride of rank and riches, yet so as to give high birth the due homage
which the Scotch for a length of time scrupulously rendered to it.

Indeed, from having had her mother's example before her for so many
years, and from a native sense of propriety and even of dignity, Mary
Avenel had acquired a demeanour, which marked her title to
consideration, and effectually checked any attempt at familiarity on
the part of those who might be her associates in her present
situation, but could not be well termed her equals. She was by nature
mild, pensive, and contemplative, gentle in disposition, and most
placable when accidentally offended; but still she was of a retired
and reserved habit, and shunned to mix in ordinary sports, even--when
the rare occurrence of a fair or wake gave her an opportunity of
mingling with companions of her own age. If at such scenes she was
seen for an instant, she appeared to behold them with the composed
indifference of one to whom their gaiety was a matter of no interest,
and who seemed only desirous to glide away from the scene as soon as
she possibly could.

Something also had transpired concerning her being born on All-hallow
Eve, and the powers with which that circumstance was supposed to
invest her over the invisible world. And from all-these particulars
combined, the young men and women of the Halidome used to distinguish
Mary among themselves by the name of the Spirit of Avenel, as if the
fair but fragile form, the beautiful but rather colourless cheek, the
dark blue eye, and the shady hair, had belonged rather to the
immaterial than the substantial world. The general tradition of the
White Lady, who was supposed to wait on the fortunes of the family of
Avenel, gave a sort of zest to this piece of rural wit. It gave great
offence, however, to the two sons of Simon Glendinning; and when the
expression was in their presence applied to the young lady, Edward was
wont to check the petulance of those who used it by strength of
argument, and Halbert by strength of arm. In such cases Halbert had
this advantage, that although ho could render no aid to his brother's
argument, yet when circumstances required it, he was sure to have that
of Edward, who never indeed himself commenced a fray, but, on the
other hand, did not testify any reluctance to enter into combat in
Halbert's behalf or in his rescue.

But the zealous attachment of the two youths, being themselves, from
the retired situation in which they dwelt, comparative strangers in
the Halidome, did not serve in any degree to alter the feelings of the
inhabitants towards the young lady, who seemed to have dropped amongst
them from another sphere of life. Still, however, she was regarded
with respect, if not with fondness; and the attention of the Sub-Prior
to the family, not to mention the formidable name of Julian Avenel,
which every new incident of those tumultuous times tended to render
more famous, attached to his niece a certain importance. Thus some
aspired to her acquaintance out of pride while the more timid of the
feuars were anxious to inculcate upon their children the necessity of
being respectful to the noble orphan. So that Mary Avenel, little
loved because little known, was regarded with a mysterious awe, partly
derived from fear of her uncle's moss-troopers, and partly from her
own retired and distant habits, enhanced by the superstitious opinions
of the time and country.

It was not without some portion of this awe, that Mysie felt herself
left alone in company with a young person so distant in rank, and so
different in bearing, from herself; for her worthy father had taken
the first opportunity to step out unobserved, in order to mark how the
barnyard was filled, and what prospect it afforded of grist to the
mill. In youth, however, there is a sort of free-masonry, which,
without much conversation, teaches young persons to estimate each
other's character, and places them at ease on the shortest
acquaintance. It is only when taught deceit by the commerce of the
world, that we learn to shroud our character from observation, and to
disguise our real sentiments from those with whom we are placed in
communion.

Accordingly, the two young women were soon engaged in such objects of
interest as best became their age. They visited Mary Avenel's pigeons,
which she nursed with the tenderness of a mother; they turned over her
slender stores of finery, which yet contained some articles that
excited the respect of her companion, though Mysie was too
good-humoured to nourish envy. A golden rosary, and some female
ornaments marking superior rank, had been rescued in the moment of
their utmost adversity, more by Tibb Tacket's presence of mind, than
by the care of their owner,--who was at that sad period too much sunk
in grief to pay any attention to such circumstances.  They struck
Mysie with a deep impression of veneration; for, excepting what the
Lord Abbot and the convent might possess, she did not believe there
was so much real gold in the world as was exhibited in these few
trinkets, and Mary, however sage and serious, was not above being
pleased with the admiration of her rustic companion.

Nothing, indeed, could exhibit a stronger contrast than the appearance
of the two girls;--the good-humoured laughter-loving countenance of
the Maid of the Mill, who stood gazing with unrepressed astonishment
on whatever was in her inexperienced eye rare and costly, and with an
humble, and at the same time cheerful acquiescence in her inferiority,
asking all the little queries about the use and value of the
ornaments, while Mary Avenel, with her quiet composed dignity and
placidity of manner, produced them one after another for the amusement
of her companion.

As they became gradually more familiar, Mysie of the Mill was just
venturing to ask, why Mary Avenel never appeared at the May-pole, and to
express her wonder when the young lady said she disliked dancing, when
a trampling of horses at the gate of the tower interrupted their
conversation.

Mysie flew to the shot-window in the full ardour of unrestrained female
curiosity. "Saint Mary! sweet lady! here come two well-mounted gallants;
will you step this way to look at them ?"

"No," said Mary Avenel, "you shall tell me who they are."

"Well, if you like it better," said Mysie--"but how shall I know
them?---Stay, I do know one of them, and so do you, lady; he is a
blithe man, somewhat light of hand, they say, but the gallants of
these days think no great harm of that. He is your uncle's henchman,
that they call Christie of the Clinthill; and he has not his old green
jerkin and the rusty blackjack over it, but a scarlet cloak, laid down
with silver lace three inches broad, and a breast-plate you might see
to dress your hair in, as well as in that keeking-glass in the ivory
frame that you showed me even now. Come, dear lady, come to the
shot-window and see him."

"If it be the man you mean, Mysie," replied the orphan of Avenel, "I
shall see him soon enough, considering either the pleasure or comfort
the sight will give me."

"Nay, but if you will not come to see gay Christie," replied the Maid
of the Mill, her face flushed with eager curiosity, "come and tell me
who the gallant is that is with him, the handsomest, the very
lovesomest young man I ever saw with sight."

"It is my foster-brother, Halbert Glendinning," said Mary, with,
apparent indifference; for she had been accustomed to call the sons of
Elspeth her foster-brethren, and to live with them as if they had been
brothers in earnest.

"Nay, by Our Lady, that it is not," said Mysie; "I know the favour of
both the Glendinnings well, and I think this rider be not of our
country.  He has a crimson velvet bonnet, and long brown hair falling
down under it, and a beard on his upper lip, and his chin clean and
close shaved, save a small patch on the point of the chin, and a
sky-blue jerkin slashed and lined with white satin, and trunk-hose to
suit, and no weapon but a rapier and dagger--Well, if I was a man, I
would never wear weapon but the rapier!  it is so slender and
becoming, instead of having a cartload of iron at my back, like my
father's broad-sword with its great rusty basket-hilt. Do you not
delight in the rapier and poniard, lady?"

"The best sword," answered Mary, "if I must needs answer a question of
the sort, is that which is drawn in the best cause, and which is best
used when it is out of the scabbard."

"But can you not guess who this stranger should be?" said Mysie.

"Indeed, I cannot even attempt it; but to judge by his companion, it is
no matter how little he is known," replied Mary.

"My benison on his bonny face," said Mysie, "if he is not going to
alight here! Now, I am as much pleased as if my father had given me
the silver earrings he has promised me so often;--nay, you had as well
come to the window, for you must see him by and by whether you will or
not." I do not know how much sooner Mary Avenel might have sought the
point of observation, if she had not been scared from it by the
unrestrained curiosity expressed by her buxom friend; but at length
the same feeling prevailed over her sense of dignity, and satisfied
with having displayed all the indifference that was necessary in point
of decorum, she no longer thought herself bound to restrain her
curiosity.

From the outshot or projecting window, she could perceive that
Christie of the Clinthill was attended on the present occasion by a
very gay and gallant cavalier, who, from the nobleness of his
countenance and manner, his rich and handsome dress, and the showy
appearance of his horse and furniture, must, she agreed with her new
friend, be a person of some consequence.

Christie also seemed conscious of something, which made him call out
with more than his usual insolence of manner, "What, ho! so ho! the
house! Churl peasants, will no one answer when I call?--Ho!
Martin,--Tibb,--Dame Glendinning--a murrain on you, must we stand
keeping our horses in the cold here, and they steaming with heat, when
we have ridden so sharply?"

At length he was obeyed, and old Martin made his appearance. "Ha!"
said Christie, "art thou there, old Truepenny? here, stable me these
steeds, and see them well bedded, and stretch thine old limbs by
rubbing them down; and see thou quit not the stable till there is not
a turned hair on either of them."

Martin took the horses to the stable as commanded, but suppressed not
his indignation a moment after he could vent it with safety. "Would
not any one think," he said to Jasper, an old ploughman, who, in
coming to his assistance, had heard Christie's imperious injunctions,
"that this loon, this Christie of the Clinthill, was laird or lord at
least of him? No such thing, man! I remember him a little dirty
turnspit boy in the house of Avenel, that every body in a frosty
morning like this warmed his fingers by kicking or cuffing! and now he
is a gentleman, and swears, d--n him and renounce him, as if the
gentlemen could not so much as keep their own wickedness to
themselves, without the like of him going to hell in their very
company, and by the same road. I have as much a mind as ever I had to
my dinner, to go back and tell him to sort his horse himself, since he
is as able as I am."

"Hout tout, man!" answered Jasper, "keep a calm sough; better to
fleech a fool than fight with him."

Martin acknowledged the truth of the proverb, and, much comforted
therewith, betook himself to cleaning the stranger's horse with great
assiduity, remarking, it was a pleasure to handle a handsome nag, and
turned over the other to the charge of Jasper. Nor was it until
Christie's commands were literally complied with that he deemed it
proper, after fitting ablutions, to join the party in the spence; not
for the purpose of waiting upon them, as a mere modern reader might
possibly expect, but that he might have his share of dinner in their
company.

In the meanwhile, Christie had presented his companion to Dame
Glendinning as Sir Piercie Shafton, a friend of his and of his master,
come to spend three or four days with little din in the tower. The
good dame could not conceive how she was entitled to such an honour,
and would fain have pleaded her want of every sort of convenience to
entertain a guest of that quality. But, indeed, the visiter, when he
cast his eyes round the bare walls, eyed the huge black chimney,
scrutinized the meagre and broken furniture of the apartment, and
beheld the embarrassment of the mistress of the family, intimated
great reluctance to intrude upon Dame Glendinning a visit, which could
scarce, from all appearances, prove otherwise than an inconvenience to
her, and a penance to himself.

But the reluctant hostess and her guest had to do with an inexorable
man, who silenced all expostulations with, "such was his master's
pleasure. And, moreover," he continued, "though the Baron of Avenel's
will must, and ought to prove law to all within ten miles around him,
yet here, dame," he said, "is a letter from your petticoated baron,
the lord-priest yonder, who enjoins you, as you regard his pleasure,
that you afford to this good knight such decent accommodation as is in
your power, suffering him to live as privately as he shall
desire.--And for you, Sir Piercie Shafton," continued Christie, "you
will judge for yourself, whether secrecy and safety is not more your
object even now, than soft beds and high cheer. And do not judge of
the dame's goods by the semblance of her cottage; for you will see by
the dinner she is about to spread for us, that the vassal of the kirk
is seldom found with her basket bare." To Mary Avenel, Christie
presented the stranger, after the best fashion he could, as to the
niece of his master the baron.

While he thus laboured to reconcile Sir Piercie Shafton to his fate,
the widow, having consulted her son Edward on the real import of the
Lord Abbot's injunction, and having found that Christie had given a
true exposition, saw nothing else left for her but to make that fate
as easy as she could to the stranger. He himself also seemed
reconciled to his lot by some feeling probably of strong necessity,
and accepted with a good grace the hospitality which the dame offered
with a very indifferent one.

In fact, the dinner, which soon smoked before the assembled guests,
was of that substantial kind which warrants plenty and comfort. Dame
Glendinning had cooked it after her best manner; and, delighted with
the handsome appearance which her good cheer made when placed on the
table, forgot both her plans and the vexations which interrupted them,
in the hospitable duty of pressing her assembled visiters to eat and
drink, watching every trencher as it waxed empty, and loading it with
fresh supplies ere the guest could utter a negative.

In the meanwhile, the company attentively regarded each other's
motions, and seemed endeavouring to form a judgment of each other's
character.  Sir Piercie Shafton condescended to speak to no one but to
Mary Avenel, and on her he conferred exactly the same familiar and
compassionate, though somewhat scornful sort of attention, which a
pretty fellow of these days will sometimes condescend to bestow on a
country miss, when there is no prettier or more fashionable woman
present. The manner indeed was different, for the etiquette of those
times did not permit Sir Piercie Shafton to pick his teeth, or to
yawn, or to gabble like the beggar whose tongue (as he says) was cut
out by the Turks, or to affect deafness or blindness, or any other
infirmity of the organs. But though the embroidery of his conversation
was different, the groundwork was the same, and the high-flown and
ornate compliments with which the gallant knight of the sixteenth
century inter-larded his conversation, were as much the offspring of
egotism and self-conceit, as the jargon of the coxcombs of our own
days.

The English knight was, however, something daunted at finding that
Mary Avenel listened with an air of indifference, and answered with
wonderful brevity, to all the fine things which ought, as he
conceived, to have dazzled her with their brilliancy, and puzzled her
by their obscurity. But if he was disappointed in making the desired,
or rather the expected impression, upon her whom he addressed, Sir
Piercie Shafton's discourse was marvellous in the ears of Mysie the
Miller's daughter, and not the less so that she did not comprehend the
meaning of a single word which he uttered. Indeed, the gallant
knight's language was far too courtly to be understood by persons of
much greater acuteness than Mysie's.

It was about this period, that the "only rare poet of his time, the
witty, comical, facetiously-quick, and quickly-facetious, John
Lylly--he that sate at Apollo's table, and to whom Phoebus gave a
wreath of his own bays without snatching" [Footnote: Such, and yet
more extravagant, are the compliments paid to this author by his
editor, Blount. Notwithstanding all exaggeration, Lylly was really a
man of wit and imagination, though both were deformed by the most
unnatural affectation that ever disgraced a printed page.]--he, in
short, who wrote that singularly coxcomical work, called _Euphues
and his England_, was in the very zenith of his absurdity and his
reputation. The quaint, forced, and unnatural style which he
introduced by his "Anatomy of Wit," had a fashion as rapid as it was
momentary--all the court ladies were his scholars, and to _parler
Euphuisme_, was as necessary a qualification to a courtly gallant,
as those of understanding how to use his rapier, or to dance a
measure.

It was no wonder that the Maid of the Mill was soon as effectually
blinded by the intricacies of this erudite and courtly style of
conversation, as she had ever been by the dust of her father's own
meal-sacks. But there she sate with her mouth and eyes as open as the
mill-door and the two windows, showing teeth as white as her father's
bolted flour, and endeavouring to secure a word or two for her own
future use out of the pearls of rhetoric which Sir Piercie Shafton
scattered around him with such bounteous profusion.

For the male part of the company, Edward felt ashamed of his own
manner and slowness of speech, when he observed the handsome young
courtier, with an ease and volubility of which he had no conception,
run over all the commonplace topics of high-flown gallantry. It is
true the good sense and natural taste of young Glendinning soon
informed him that the gallant cavalier was speaking nonsense. But,
alas! where is the man of modest merit, and real talent, who has not
suffered from being outshone in conversation and outstripped in the
race of life, by men of less reserve, and of qualities more showy,
though less substantial? and well constituted must the mind be, that
can yield up the prize without envy to competitors more worthy than
himself.

Edward Glendinning had no such philosophy. While he despised the
jargon of the gay cavalier, he envied the facility with which he could
run on, as well as the courtly tone and expression, and the perfect
ease and elegance with which he offered all the little acts of
politeness to which the duties of the table gave opportunity. And if I
am to speak truth, I must own that he envied those qualities the more
as they were all exercised in Mary Avenel's service, and, although
only so far accepted as they could not be refused, intimated a wish on
the stranger's part to place himself in her good graces, as the only
person in the room to whom he thought it worth while to recommend
himself. His title, rank, and very handsome figure, together with some
sparks of wit and spirit which flashed across the cloud of nonsense
which he uttered, rendered him, as the words of the old song say, "a
lad for a lady's viewing;" so that poor Edward, with all his real
worth and acquired knowledge, in his home-spun doublet, blue cap, and
deerskin trowsers, looked like a clown beside the courtier, and,
feeling the full inferiority, nourished no good-will to him by whom he
was eclipsed.

Christie, on the other hand, as soon as he had satisfied to the full a
commodious appetite, by means of which persons of his profession
could, like the wolf and eagle, gorge themselves with as much food at
one meal as might serve them for several days, began also to feel
himself more in the back-ground than he liked to be. This worthy had,
amongst his other good qualities, an excellent opinion of himself;
and, being of a bold and forward disposition, had no mind to be thrown
into the shade by any one. With an impudent familiarity which such
persons mistake for graceful ease, he broke in upon the knight's
finest speeches with as little remorse as he would have driven the
point of his lance through a laced doublet.  Sir Piercie Shafton, a
man of rank and high birth, by no means encouraged or endured this
familiarity, and requited the intruder either with total neglect, or
such laconic replies as intimated a sovereign contempt for the rude
spearman, who affected to converse with him upon terms of equality.

The Miller held his peace; for, as his usual conversation turned
chiefly on his clapper and toll-dish, he had no mind to brag of his
wealth in presence of Christie of the Clinthill, or to intrude his
discourse on the English cavalier.

A little specimen of the conversation may not be out of place, were it
but to show young ladies what fine things they have lost by living when
Euphuism is out of fashion.

"Credit me, fairest lady," said the knight, "that such is the cunning
of our English courtiers, of the hodiernal strain, that, as they have
infinitely refined upon the plain and rusticial discourse of our
fathers, which, as I may say, more beseemed the mouths of country
roisterers in a May-game than that of courtly gallants in a galliard,
so I hold it ineffably and unutterably impossible, that those who may
succeed us in that garden of wit and courtesy shall alter or amend it.
Venus delighted but in the language of Mercury, Bucephalus will stoop
to no one but Alexander, none can sound Apollo's pipe but Orpheus."

"Valiant sir," said Mary, who could scarcely help laughing, "we have
but to rejoice in the chance which hath honoured this solitude with a
glimpse of the sun of courtesy, though it rather blinds than
enlightens us."

"Pretty and quaint, fairest lady," answered the Euphuist. "Ah, that I
had with me my Anatomy of Wit--that all-to-be-unparalleled
volume--that quintessence of human wit--that treasury of quaint
invention--that exquisitively-pleasant-to-read, and
inevitably-necessary-to-be-remembered manual, of all that is worthy to
be known--which indoctrines the rude in civility, the dull in
intellectuality, the heavy in jocosity, the blunt in gentility, the
vulgar in nobility, and all of them in that unutterable perfection, of
human utterance, that eloquence which no other eloquence is sufficient
to praise, that art which, when we call it by its own name of
Euphuism, we bestow on it its richest panegyric."

"By Saint Mary," said Christie of the Clinthill, "if your worship had
told me that you had left such stores of wealth as you talk of at
Prudhoe Castle, Long Dickie and I would have had them off with us if
man and horse could have carried them; but you told us of no treasure
I wot of, save the silver tongs for turning up your mustachoes."

The knight treated this intruder's mistake--for certainly Christie had
no idea that all these epithets which sounded so rich and splendid,
were lavished upon a small quarto volume--with a stare, and then
turning again to Mary Avenel, the only person whom he thought worthy
to address, he proceeded in his strain of high-flown oratory, "Even
thus," said he, "do hogs contemn the splendour of Oriental pearls;
even thus are the delicacies of a choice repast in vain offered to the
long-eared grazer of the common, who turneth from them to devour a
thistle. Surely as idle is it to pour forth the treasures of oratory
before the eyes of the ignorant, and to spread the dainties of the
intellectual banquet before those who are, morally and metaphysically
speaking, no better than asses."

"Sir Knight, since that is your quality," said Edward, "we cannot
strive with you in loftiness of language; but I pray you in fair
courtesy, while you honour my father's house with your presence, to
spare us such vile comparisons."

"Peace, good villagio," said the knight, gracefully waving his hand,
"I prithee peace, kind rustic; and you, my guide, whom I may scarce
call honest, let me prevail upon you to imitate the laudable
taciturnity of that honest yeoman, who sits as mute as a mill-post,
and of that comely damsel, who seems as with her ears she drank in
what she did not altogether comprehend, even as a palfrey listening to
a lute, whereof, howsoever, he knoweth not the gamut."

"Marvellous fine words," at length said Dame Glendinning, who began
to be tired of sitting so long silent, "marvellous fine words, neighbour
Happer, are they not?"

"Brave words--very brave words--very exceeding pyet words," answered
the Miller; "nevertheless, to speak my mind, a lippy of bran were worth
a bushel of them."

"I think so too, under his worship's favour," answered Christie of the
Clinthill. "I well remember that at the race of Morham, as we call it,
near Berwick, I took a young Southern fellow out of saddle with my
lance, and cast him, it might be, a gad's length from his nag; and so,
as he had some gold on his laced doublet, I deemed he might ha' the
like on it in his pocket too, though that is a rule that does not aye
hold good--So I was speaking to him of ransom, and out he comes with a
handful of such terms as his honour there hath gleaned up, and craved
me for mercy, as I was a true son of Mars, and such like."

"And obtained no mercy at thy hand, I dare be sworn," said the knight,
who deigned not to speak Euphuism excepting to the fair sex.

"By my troggs," replied Christie, "I would have thrust my lance down
his throat, but just then they flung open that accursed postern-gate,
and forth pricked old Hunsdon, and Henry Carey, and as many fellows at
their heels as turned the chase northward again. So I e'en pricked
Bayard with the spur, and went off with the rest; for a man should
ride when he may not wrestle, as they say in Tynedale."

"Trust me," said the knight, again turning to Mary Avenel, "if I do
not pity you, lady, who, being of noble blood, are thus in a manner
compelled to abide in the cottage of the ignorant, like the precious
stone in the head of the toad, or like a precious garland on the brow
of an ass.--But soft, what gallant have we here, whose garb savoureth
more of the rustic than doth his demeanour, and whose looks seem more
lofty than his habit; even as--"

"I pray you, Sir Knight," said Mary, "to spare your courtly similitudes
for refined ears, and give me leave to name unto you my foster-brother,
Halbert Glendinning."

"The son of the good dame of the cottage, as I opine," answered the
English knight; "for by some such name did my guide discriminate the
mistress of this mansion, which you, madam, enrich with your
presence.--And yet, touching this juvenal, he hath that about him
which belongeth to higher birth, for all are not black who dig
coals--"

"Nor all white who are millers," said honest Happer, glad to get in a
word, as they say, edgeways.

Halbert, who had sustained the glance of the Englishman with some
impatience, and knew not what to make of his manner and language,
replied with some asperity, "Sir Knight, we have in this land of
Scotland an ancient saying, 'Scorn not the bush that bields you'--you
are a guest of my father's house to shelter you from danger, if I am
rightly informed by the domestics. Scoff not its homeliness, nor that
of its inmates--ye might long have abidden at the court of England,
ere we had sought your favour, or cumbered you with our society. Since
your fate has sent you hither amongst us, be contented with such fare
and such converse as we can afford you, and scorn us not for our
kindness; for the Scots wear short patience and long daggers."

All eyes were turned on Halbert while he was thus speaking, and there
was a general feeling that his countenance had an expression of
intelligence, and his person an air of dignity, which they had never
before observed.  Whether it were that the wonderful Being with whom
he had so lately held communication, had bestowed on him a grace and
dignity of look and bearing which he had not before, or whether the
being conversant in high matters, and called to a destiny beyond that
of other men, had a natural effect in giving becoming confidence to
his language and manner, we pretend not to determine. But it was
evident to all, that, from this day, young Halbert was an altered man;
that he acted with the steadiness, promptitude, and determination,
which belonged to riper years, and bore himself with a manner which
appertained to higher rank.

The knight took the rebuke with good humour. "By my mine honour," he
said, "thou hast reason on thy side, good juvenal--nevertheless, I
spoke not as in ridicule of the roof which relieves me, but rather in
your own praise, to whom, if this roof be native, thou mayst
nevertheless rise from its lowliness; even as the lark, which maketh
its humble nest in the furrow, ascendeth towards the sun, as well as
the eagle which buildeth her eyry in the cliff."

This high-flown discourse was interrupted by Dame Glendinning, who,
with all the busy anxiety of a mother, was loading her son's trencher
with food, and dinning in his ear her reproaches on account of his
prolonged absence. "And see," she said, "that you do not one day get
such a sight while you are walking about among the haunts of them that
are not of our flesh and bone, as befell Mungo Murray when he slept on
the greensward ring of the Auld Kirkhill at sunset, and wakened at
daybreak in the wild hills of Breadalbane. And see that, when you are
looking for deer, the red stag does not gall you as he did Diccon
Thorburn, who never overcast the wound that he took from a buck's
horn. And see, when you go swaggering about with a long broadsword by
your side, whilk it becomes no peaceful man to do, that you dinna meet
with them that have broadsword and lance both--there are enow of rank
riders in this land, that neither fear God nor regard man."

Here her eye "in a fine frenzy rolling," fell full upon that of
Christie of the Clinthill, and at once her fears for having given
offence interrupted the current of maternal rebuke, which, like rebuke
matrimonial, may be often better meant than timed. There was something
of sly and watchful significance in Christie's eye, an eye gray, keen,
fierce, yet wily, formed to express at once cunning, and malice, which
made the dame instantly conjecture she had said too much, while she
saw in imagination her twelve goodly cows go lowing down the glen in a
moonlight night, with half a score of Border spearsmen at their heels.

Her voice, therefore, sunk from the elevated tone of maternal
authority into a whimpering apologetic sort of strain, and she
proceeded to say, "It is no that I have ony ill thoughts of the Border
riders, for Tibb Tacket there has often heard me say that I thought
spear and bridle as natural to a Borderman as a pen to a priest, or a
feather-fan to a lady; and--have you not heard me say it, Tibb?"

Tibb showed something less than her expected alacrity in attesting her
mistress's deep respect for the freebooters of the southland hills;
but, thus conjured, did at length reply, "Hout ay, mistress, I'se
warrant I have heard you say something like that."

"Mother!" said Halbert, in a firm and commanding tone of voice, "what
or whom is it that you fear under my father's roof?--I well hope that
it harbours not a guest in whose presence you are afraid to say your
pleasure to me or my brother? I am sorry I have been detained so late,
being ignorant of the fair company which I should encounter on my
return.--I pray you let this excuse suffice: and what satisfies you,
will, I trust, be nothing less than acceptable to your guests."

An answer calculated so jistly betwixt the submission due to his
parent, and the natural feeling of dignity in one who was by birth
master of the mansion, excited universal satisfaction. And as Elspeth
herself confessed to Tibb on the same evening, "She did not think it
had been in the callant.  Till that night, he took pets and passions
if he was spoke to, and lap through the house like a four-year-auld at
the least word of advice that was minted at him, but now he spoke as
grave and as douce as the Lord Abbot himself.  She kendna," she said,
"what might be the upshot of it, but it was like he was a wonderfu'
callant even now."

The party then separated, the young men retiring to their apartments,
the elder to their household cares. While Christie went to see his horse
properly accommodated, Edward betook himself to his book, and Halbert,
who was as ingenious in employing his hands as he had hitherto appeared
imperfect in mental exertion, applied himself to constructing a place of
concealment in the floor of his apartment by raising a plank, beneath
which he resolved to deposit that copy of the Holy Scriptures which had
been so strangely regained from the possession of men and spirits.

In the meanwhile Sir Piercie Shafton sate still as a stone, in the
chair in which he had deposited himself, his hands folded on his
breast, his legs stretched straight out before him and resting upon
the heels, his eyes cast up to the ceiling as if he had meant to count
every mesh of every cobweb with which the arched roof was canopied,
wearing at the same time a face of as solemn and imperturbable
gravity, as if his existence had depended on the accuracy of his
calculation.

He could scarce be roused from his listless state of contemplative
absorption so as to take some supper, a meal at which the younger
females appeared not. Sir Piercie stared around twice or thrice as if
he missed something; but he asked not for them, and only evinced his
sense of a proper audience being wanting, by his abstraction and
absence of mind, seldom speaking until he was twice addressed, and
then replying, without trope or figure, in that plain English which
nobody could speak better when he had a mind.

Christie, finding himself in undisturbed possession of the
conversation, indulged all who chose to listen with details of his own
wild and inglorious warfare, while Dame Elspeth's curch bristled with
horror, and Tibb Tacket, rejoiced to find herself once more in the
company of a jackman, listened to his tales, like Desdemona to
Othello's, with undisguised delight. Meantime the two young
Glendinnings were each wrapped up in his own reflections, and only
interrupted in them by the signal to move bedward.

        *        *         *        *         *



Chapter the Fifteenth.


  He strikes no coin,'tis true, but coins new phrases,
  And vends them forth as knaves vend gilded counters,
  Which wise men scorn, and fools accept in payment.
                             OLD PLAY.

In the morning Christie of the Clinthill was nowhere to be seen. As this
worthy personage did seldom pique himself on sounding a trumpet before
his movements, no one was surprised at his moonlight departure, though
some alarm was excited lest he had not made it empty-handed. So, in the
language of the national ballad,

  Some ran to cupboard, and some to kist,
  But nought was away that could be mist.

All was in order, the key of the stable left above the door, and that
of the iron-grate in the inside of the lock. In short, the retreat had
been made with scrupulous attention to the security of the garrison,
and so far Christie left them nothing to complain of.

The safety of the premises was ascertained by Halbert, who instead of
catching up a gun or cross-bow, and sallying out for the day as had
been his frequent custom, now, with a gravity beyond his years, took a
survey of all around the tower, and then returned to the spence, or
public apartment, in which, at the early hour of seven, the morning
meal was prepared.

There he found the Euphuist in the same elegant posture of abstruse
calculation which he had exhibited on the preceding evening, his arms
folded in the same angle, his eyes turned up to the same cobwebs, and
his heels resting on the ground as before. Tired of this affectation
of indolent importance, and not much flattered with his guest's
persevering in it to the last, Halbert resolved at once to break the
ice, being determined to know what circumstance had brought to the
tower of Glendinning a guest at once so supercilious and so silent.

"Sir Knight," he said with some firmness, "I have twice given you good
morning, to which the absence of your mind hath, I presume, prevented
you from yielding attention, or from making return. This exchange of
courtesy is at your pleasure to give or withhold--But, as what I have
further to say concerns your comfort and your motions in an especial
manner, I will entreat you to give me some signs of attention, that I
may be sure I am not wasting my words on a monumental image."

At this unexpected address, Sir Piercie Shafton opened his eyes, and
afforded the speaker a broad stare; but as Halbert returned the glance
without either confusion or dismay, the knight thought proper to
change his posture, draw in his legs, raise his eyes, fix them on
young Glendinning, and assume the appearance of one who listens to
what is said to him. Nay, to make his purpose more evident, he gave
voice to his resolution in these words, "Speak! we do hear."

"Sir Knight," said the youth, "it is the custom of this Halidome, or
patrimony of St. Mary's, to trouble with inquiries no guests who
receive our hospitality, providing they tarry in our house only for a
single revolution of the sun. We know that both criminals and debtors
come hither for sanctuary, and we scorn to extort from the pilgrim,
whom chance may make our guest, an avowal of the cause of his
pilgrimage and penance. But when one so high above our rank as
yourself, Sir Knight, and especially one to whom the possession of
such pre-eminence is not indifferent, shows his determination to be
our guest for a longer time, it is our usage to inquire of him whence
he comes, and what is the cause of his journey?"

The English knight gaped twice or thrice before he answered, and then
replied in a bantering tone, "Truly, good villagio, your question hath
in it somewhat of embarrassment, for you ask me of things concerning
which I am not as yet altogether determined what answer I may find it
convenient to make. Let it suffice thee, kind juvenal, that thou hast
the Lord Abbot's authority for treating me to the best of that power
of thine, which, indeed, may not always so well suffice for my
accommodation as either of us would desire."

"I must have a more precise answer than this, Sir Knight," said the
young Glendinning.

"Friend," said the knight, "be not outrageous. It may suit your
northern manners thus to press harshly upon the secrets of thy
betters; but believe me, that even as the lute, struck by an unskilful
hand, doth produce discords, so----" At this moment the door of the
apartment opened, and Mary Avenel presented herself--"But who can talk
of discords," said the knight, assuming his complimentary vein and
humour, "when the soul of harmony descends upon us in the presence of
surpassing beauty! For even as foxes, wolves, and other animals void
of sense and reason, do fly from the presence of the resplendent sun
of heaven when he arises in his glory, so do strife, wrath, and all
ireful passions retreat, and, as it were, scud away, from the face
which now beams upon us, with power to compose our angry passions,
illuminate our errors and difficulties, soothe our wounded minds, and
lull to rest our disorderly apprehensions; for as the heat and warmth
of the eye of day is to the material and physical world, so is the eye
which I now bow down before to that of the intellectual microcosm."

He concluded with a profound bow; and Mary Avenel, gazing from one to
the other, and plainly seeing that something was amiss, could only
say, "For heaven's sake, what is the meaning of this?"

The newly-acquired tact and intelligence of her foster-brother was as
yet insufficient to enable him to give an answer. He was quite
uncertain how he ought to deal with a guest, who preserving a
singularly high tone of assumed superiority and importance, seemed
nevertheless so little serious in what he said, that it was quite
impossible to discern with accuracy whether he was in jest or earnest.

Forming, however, the internal resolution to bring Sir Piercie Shafton
to a reckoning at a more fit place and season, he resolved to
prosecute the matter no farther at present; and the entrance of his
mother with the damsel of the Mill, and the return of the honest
Miller from the stack-yard, where he had been numbering and
calculating the probable amount of the season's grist, rendered
farther discussion impossible for the moment.

In the course of the calculation it could not but strike the man of
meal and grindstones, that after the church's dues were paid, and
after all which he himself could by any means deduct from the crop,
still the residue which must revert to Dame Glendinning could not be
less than considerable. I wot not if this led the honest Miller to
nourish any plans similar to those adopted by Elspeth; but it is
certain that he accepted with grateful alacrity an invitation which
the dame gave to his daughter, to remain a week or two as her guest at
Glendearg.

The principal persons being thus in high good humour with each other,
all business gave place to the hilarity of the morning repast; and so
much did Sir Piercie appear gratified by the attention which was paid
to every word that he uttered by the nut-brown Mysie, that,
notwithstanding his high birth and distinguished quality, he bestowed
on her some of the more ordinary and second-rate tropes of his
elocution.

Mary Avenel, when relieved from the awkwardness of feeling the full
weight of his conversation addressed to herself, enjoyed it much more;
and the good knight, encouraged by those conciliating marks of
approbation from the sex, for whose sake he cultivated his oratorical
talents, made speedy intimation of his purpose to be more
communicative than he had shown himself in his conversation with
Halbert Glendinning, and gave them to understand, that it was in
consequence of some pressing danger that he was at present their
involuntary guest.

The conclusion of the breakfast was a signal for the separation of the
company. The Miller went to prepare for his departure; his daughter to
arrange matters for her unexpected stay; Edward was summoned to
consultation by Martin concerning some agricultural matter, in which
Halbert could not be brought to interest himself; the dame left the
room upon her household concerns, and Mary was in the act of following
her, when she suddenly recollected, that if she did so, the strange
knight and Halbert must be left alone together, at the risk of another
quarrel.

The maiden no sooner observed this circumstance, than she instantly
returned from the door of the apartment, and, seating herself in a
small stone window-seat, resolved to maintain that curb which she was
sensible her presence imposed on Halbert Glendinning, of whose quick
temper she had some apprehensions.

The stranger marked her motions, and, either interpreting them as
inviting his society, or obedient to those laws of gallantry which
permitted him not to leave a lady in silence and solitude, he
instantly placed himself near to her side and opened the conversation
as follows:--

"Credit me, fair lady" he said, addressing Mary Avenel, "it much
rejoiceth me, being, as I am, a banished man from the delights of mine
own country, that I shall find here in this obscure and silvan cottage
of the north, a fair form and a candid soul, with whom I may explain
my mutual sentiments. And let me pray you in particular, lovely lady,
that, according to the universal custom now predominant in our court,
the garden of superior wits, you will exchange with me some epithet
whereby you may mark my devotion to your service. Be henceforward
named, for example, my Protection, and let me be your Affability."

"Our northern and country manners, Sir Knight, do not permit us to
exchange epithets with those to whom we are strangers," replied Mary
Avenel.

"Nay, but see now," said the knight, "how you are startled! even as
the unbroken steed, which swerves aside from the shaking of a
handkerchief, though he must in time encounter the waving of a pennon.
This courtly exchange of epithets of honour, is no more than the
compliments which pass between valour and beauty, wherever they meet,
and under whatever circumstances. Elizabeth of England herself calls
Philip Sydney her Courage, and he in return calls that princess his
Inspiration. Wherefore, my fair Protection, for by such epithet it
shall be mine to denominate you--"

"Not without the young lady's consent, sir!" interrupted Halbert;
"most truly do I hope your courtly and quaint breeding will not so far
prevail over the more ordinary rules of civil behaviour."

"Fair tenant of an indifferent copyhold," replied the knight, with the
same coolness and civility of mien, but in a tone somewhat more lofty
than he used to the young lady, "we do not in the southern parts, much
intermingle discourse, save with those with whom we may stand on some
footing of equality; and I must, in all discretion, remind you, that
the necessity which makes us inhabitants of the same cabin, doth not
place us otherwise on a level with each other."

"By Saint Mary," replied young Glendinning, "it is my thought that it
does; for plain men hold, that he who asks the shelter is indebted to
him who gives it; and so far, therefore, is our rank equalized while
this roof covers us both."

"Thou art altogether deceived," answered Sir Piercie; "and that thou
mayst fully adapt thyself to our relative condition, know that I
account not myself thy guest, but that of thy master, the Lord Abbot
of Saint Mary's, who, for reasons best known to himself and me,
chooseth to administer his hospitality to me through the means of
thee, his servant and vassal, who art, therefore, in good truth, as
passive an instrument of my accommodation as this ill-made and rugged
joint-stool on which I sit, or as the wooden trencher from which I eat
my coarse commons. Wherefore," he added, turning to Mary, "fairest
mistress, or rather, as I said before, most lovely Protection--"
[Footnote: There are many instances to be met with in the ancient
dramas of this whimsical and conceited custom of persons who formed an
intimacy, distinguishing: each, other by some quaint epithet. In
_Every Man out of his Humour_, there is a humorous debate upon
names most fit to bind the relation betwixt Sogliardo and Cavaliero
Shift, which ends by adopting those of Countenance and Resolution.
What is more to the point is in the speech of Hedon, a voluptuary and
a courtier in _Cynthia's Revels_. "you know that I call Madam
Plilantia my _Honour,_ and she calls me her _Ambition._ Now,
when I meet her in the presence, anon, I will come to her and say,
'Sweet Honour, I have hitherto contented my sense with the lilies of
your hand, and now I will taste the roses of your lip.' To which she
cannot but blushing answer, 'Nay, now you are too ambitious;' and then
do I reply, 'I cannot be too ambitious of Honour, sweet lady. Wilt not
be good?'"--I think there is some remnant of this foppery preserved in
masonic lodges, where each brother is distinguished by a name in the
Lodge, signifying some abstract quality as Discretion, or the like.
See the poems of Gavin Wilson.]

Mary Avenel was about to reply to him, when the stern, fierce, and
resentful expression of voice and countenance with which Halbert
exclaimed, "not from the King of Scotland, did he live, would I brook
such terms!" induced her to throw herself between him and the
stranger, exclaiming, "for God's sake, Halbert, beware what you do!"

"Fear not, fairest Protection," replied Sir Piercie, with the utmost
serenity, "that I can be provoked by this rustical and mistaught
juvenal to do aught misbecoming your presence or mine own dignity; for
as soon shall the gunner's linstock give fire unto the icicle, as the
spark of passion inflame my blood, tempered as it is to serenity by
the respect due to the presence of my gracious Protection."

"You may well call her your protection, Sir Knight" said Halbert; "by
Saint Andrew, it is the only sensible word I have heard you speak! But
we may meet where her protection shall no longer afford you shelter."

"Fairest Protection," continued the courtier, not even honouring with
a look, far less with a direct reply, the threat of the incensed
Halbert, "doubt not that thy faithful Affability will be more commoved
by the speech of this rudesby, than the bright and serene moon is
perturbed by the baying of the cottage-cur, proud of the height of his
own dunghill, which, in his conceit, lifteth him nearer unto the
majestic luminary."

To what lengths so unsavoury a simile might have driven Halbert's
indignation, is left uncertain; for at that moment Edward rushed into
the apartment with the intelligence that two most important officers
of the Convent, the Kitchener and Refectioner, were just arrived with
a sumpter-mule, loaded with provisions, announcing that the Lord
Abbot, the Sub-Prior, and the Sacristan, were on their way thither. A
circumstance so very extraordinary had never been recorded in the
annals of Saint Mary's, or in the traditions of Glendearg, though
there was a faint legendary report that a certain Abbot had dined
there in old days, after having been bewildered in a hunting
expedition amongst the wilds which lie to the northward. But that the
present Lord Abbot should have taken a voluntary journey to so wild
and dreary a spot, the very Kamtschatka of the Halidome, was a thing
never dreamt of; and the news excited the greatest surprise in all the
members of the family saving Halbert alone.

This fiery youth was too full of the insult he had received to think
of anything as unconnected with it. "I am glad of it," he exclaimed;
"I am glad the Abbot comes hither. I will know of him by what right
this stranger is sent hither to domineer over us under our father's
roof, as if we were slaves and not freemen. I will tell the proud
priest to his beard--"

"Alas! alas! my brother," said Edward, "think what these words may
cost thee!"

"And what will, or what can they cost me," said Halbert, "that I should
sacrifice my human feelings and my justifiable resentment to the fear of
what the Abbot can do?"

"Our mother--our mother!" exclaimed Edward; "think, if she is deprived
of her home, expelled from her property, how can you amend what
your rashness may ruin?"

"It is too true, by Heaven!" said Halbert, striking his forehead.
Then, stamping his foot against the floor to express the full energy
of the passion to which he dared no longer give vent, he turned round
and left the apartment.

Mary Avenel looked at the stranger knight, while she was endeavouring
to frame a request that he would not report the intemperate violence
of her foster-brother to the prejudice of his family, in the mind of
the Abbot. But Sir Piercie, the very pink of courtesy, conjectured her
meaning from her embarrassment, and waited not to be entreated.

"Credit me, fairest Protection," said he, "your Affability is less
than capable of seeing or hearing, far less of reciting or
reiterating, aught of an unseemly nature which may have chanced while
I enjoyed the Elysium of your presence. The winds of idle passion may
indeed rudely agitate the bosom of the rude; but the heart of the
courtier is polished to resist them.  As the frozen lake receives not
the influence of the breeze, even so--"

The voice of Dame Glendinning, in shrill summons, here demanded Mary
Avenel's attendance, who instantly obeyed, not a little glad to escape
from the compliments and similes of this courtlike gallant. Nor was it
apparently less a relief on his part; for no sooner was she past the
threshold of the room, than he exchanged the look of formal and
elaborate politeness which had accompanied each word he had uttered
hitherto, for an expression of the utmost lassitude and ennui; and
after indulging in one or two portentous yawns, broke forth into a
soliloquy.

"What the foul fiend sent this wench hither? As if it were not
sufficient plague to be harboured in a hovel that would hardly serve
for a dog's kennel in England, baited by a rude peasant-boy, and
dependent on the faith of a mercenary ruffian, but I cannot even have
time to muse over my own mishap, but must come aloft, frisk, fidget,
and make speeches, to please this pale hectic phantom, because she has
gentle blood in her veins? By mine honour, setting prejudice aside,
the mill-wench is the more attractive of the two--But patienza,
Piercie Shafton; thou must not lose thy well-earned claim to be
accounted a devout servant of the fair sex, a witty-brained, prompt,
and accomplished courtier. Rather thank heaven, Piercie Shafton, which
hath sent thee a subject, wherein, without derogating from thy rank,
(since the honours of the Avenel family are beyond dispute,) thou
mayest find a whetstone for thy witty compliments, a strop whereon to
sharpen thine acute engine, a butt whereat to shoot the arrows of thy
gallantry.  For even as a Bilboa blade, the more it is rubbed, the
brighter and the sharper will it prove, so--But what need I waste my
stock of similitudes in holding converse with myself?--Yonder comes
the monkish retinue, like some half score of crows winging their way
slowly up the valley--I hope, a'gad, they have not forgotten my
trunk-mails of apparel amid the ample provision they have made for
their own belly-timber--Mercy, a'gad, I were finely helped up if the
vesture has miscarried among the thievish Borderers!"

Stung by this reflection, he ran hastily down stairs, and caused his
horse to be saddled, that he might, as soon as possible, ascertain
this important point, by meeting the Lord Abbot and his retinue as
they came up the glen.  He had not ridden a mile before he met them
advancing with the slowness and decorum which became persons of their
dignity and profession. The knight failed not to greet the Lord Abbot
with all the formal compliments with which men of rank at that period
exchanged courtesies. He had the good fortune to find that his mails
were numbered among the train of baggage which attended upon the
party; and, satisfied in that particular, he turned his horse's head,
and accompanied the Abbot to the Tower of Glendearg.

Great, in the meanwhile, had been the turmoil of the good Dame Elspeth
and her coadjutors, to prepare for the fitting reception of the Father
Lord Abbot and his retinue. The monks had indeed taken care not to
trust too much to the state of her pantry; but she was not the less
anxious to make such additions as might enable her to claim the thanks
of her feudal lord and spiritual father. Meeting Halbert, as, with his
blood on fire, he returned from his altercation with her guest, she
commanded him instantly to go forth to the hill, and not to return
without venison; reminding him that he was apt enough to go thither
for his own pleasure, and must now do so for the credit of the house.

The Miller, who was now hastening his journey homewards, promised to
send up some salmon by his own servant. Dame Elspeth, who by this time
thought she had guests enough, had begun to repent of her invitation
to poor Mysie, and was just considering by what means, short of giving
offence, she could send off the Maid of the Mill behind her father,
and adjourn all her own aerial architecture till some future
opportunity, when this unexpected generosity on the part of the sire
rendered any present attempt to return his daughter on his hands too
highly ungracious to be farther thought on. So the Miller departed
alone on his homeward journey.

Dame Elspeth's sense of hospitality proved in this instance its own
reward; for Mysie had dwelt too near the Convent to be altogether
ignorant of the noble art of cookery, which her father patronized to
the extent of consuming on festival days such dainties as his daughter
could prepare in emulation of the luxuries of the Abbot's kitchen.
Laying aside, therefore, her holiday kirtle, and adopting a dress more
suitable to the occasion, the good-humored maiden bared her snowy arms
above the elbows; and, as Elspeth acknowledged, in the language of the
time and country, took "entire and aefauld part with her" in the
labours of the day; showing unparalleled talent, and indefatigable
industry, in the preparation of _mortreux_, _blanc-manger_,
and heaven knows what delicacies besides, which Dame Glendinning,
unassisted by her skill, dared not even have dreamt of presenting.
Leaving this able substitute in the kitchen, and regretting that Mary
Avenel was so brought up, that she could intrust nothing to her care,
unless it might be seeing the great chamber strewed with rushes, and
ornamented with such flowers and branches as the season afforded, Dame
Elspeth hastily donned her best attire, and with a beating heart
presented herself at the door of her little tower, to make her
obeisance to the Lord Abbot as he crossed her humble threshold. Edward
stood by his mother, and felt the same palpitation, which his
philosophy was at a loss to account for. He was yet to learn how long
it is ere our reason is enabled to triumph over the force of external
circumstances, and how much our feelings are affected by novelty, and
blunted by use and habit.

On the present occasion, he witnessed with wonder and awe the approach
of some half-score of riders, sober men upon sober palfreys, muffled
in their long black garments, and only relieved by their white
scapularies, showing more like a funeral procession than aught else,
and not quickening their pace beyond that which permitted easy
conversation and easy digestion.  The sobriety of the scene was indeed
somewhat enlivened by the presence of Sir Piercie Shafton, who, to
show that his skill in the manege was not inferior to his other
accomplishments, kept alternately pressing and checking his gay
courser, forcing him to piaffe, to caracole, to passage, and to do all
the other feats of the school, to the great annoyance of the Lord
Abbot, the wonted sobriety of whose palfrey became at length
discomposed by the vivacity of its companion, while the dignitary kept
crying out in bodily alarm, "I do pray you--Sir Knight--good now, Sir
Piercie--Be quiet, Benedict, there is a good steed--soh, poor fellow"
and uttering all the other precatory and soothing exclamations by
which a timid horseman usually bespeaks the favour of a frisky
companion, or of his own unquiet nag, and concluding the bead-roll
with a sincere _Deo gratias_ so soon as he alighted in the
court-yard of the Tower of Glendearg.

The inhabitants unanimously knelt down to kiss the hand of the Lord
Abbot, a ceremony which even the monks were often condemned to. Good
Abbot Boniface was too much fluttered by the incidents of the latter
part of his journey, to go through this ceremony with much solemnity,
or indeed with much patience. He kept wiping his brow with a
snow-white handkerchief with one hand, while another was abandoned to
the homage of his vassals; and then signing the cross with his
outstretched arm, and exclaiming, "Bless ye--bless ye, my children" he
hastened into the house, and murmured not a little at the darkness and
steepness of the rugged winding stair, whereby he at length scaled the
spence destined for his entertainment, and, overcome with fatigue,
threw himself, I do not say into an easy chair, but into the easiest
the apartment afforded.




Chapter the Sixteenth.


     A courtier extraordinary, who by diet
     Of meats and drinks, his temperate exercise,
     Choice music, frequent bath, his horary shifts
     Of shirts and waistcoats, means to immortalize
     Mortality itself, and makes the essence
     Of his whole happiness the trim of court.
                                         MAGNETIC LADY.


When the Lord Abbot had suddenly and superciliously vanished from the
eyes of his expectant vassals, the Sub-Prior made amends for the
negligence of his principal, by the kind and affectionate greeting
which he gave to all the members of the family, but especially to Dame
Elspeth, her foster-daughter, and her son Edward. "Where," he even
condescended to inquire, "is that naughty Nimrod, Halbert?--He hath
not yet, I trust, turned, like his great prototype, his hunting-spear
against man!"

"O no, an it please your reverence," said Dame Glendinning, "Halbert
is up at the glen to get some venison, or surely he would not have been
absent when such a day of honour dawned upon me and mine."

"Oh, to get savoury meat, such as our soul loveth," muttered the
Sub-Prior; "it has been at times an acceptable gift.--I bid you good
morrow, my good dame, as I must attend upon his lordship the Father
Abbot."

"And O, reverend sir," said the good widow, detaining him, "if it
might be your pleasure to take part with us if there is any thing
wrong; and if there is any thing wanted, to say that it is just
coming, or to make some excuses your learning best knows how. Every
bit of vassail and silver work have we been spoiled of since Pinkie
Cleuch, when I lost poor Simon Glendinning, that was the warst of a'."

"Never mind--never fear," said the Sub-Prior, gently extricating his
garment from the anxious grasp of Dame Elspeth, "the Refectioner has
with him the Abbot's plate and drinking cups; and I pray you to believe
that whatever is short in your entertainment will be deemed amply made
up in your good-will."

So saying, he escaped from her and went into the spence, where such
preparations as haste permitted were making for the noon collation of
the Abbot and the English knight. Here he found the Lord Abbot, for
whom a cushion, composed of all the plaids in the house, had been
unable to render Simon's huge elbow-chair a soft or comfortable place
of rest.

"Benedicite!" said Abbot Boniface, "now marry fie upon these hard
benches with all my heart--they are as uneasy as the _scabella_
of our novices. Saint Jude be with us, Sir Knight, how have you
contrived to pass over the night in this dungeon? An your bed was no
softer than your seat, you might as well have slept on the stone couch
of Saint Pacomius.  After trotting a full ten miles, a man needs a
softer seat than has fallen to my hard lot."

With sympathizing faces, the Sacristan and the Refectioner ran to
raise the Lord Abbot, and to adjust his seat to his mind, which was at
length accomplished in some sort, although he continued alternately to
bewail his fatigue, and to exult in the conscious sense of having
discharged an arduous duty. "You errant cavaliers," said he,
addressing the knight, "may now perceive that others have their
travail and their toils to undergo as well as your honoured faculty.
And this I will say for myself and the soldiers of Saint Mary, among
whom I may be termed captain, that it is not our wont to flinch from
the heat of the service, or to withdraw from the good fight.  No, by
Saint Mary!--no sooner did I learn that you were here, and dared
not for certain reasons come to the Monastery, where, with as good
will, and with more convenience, we might have given you a better
reception, than, striking the table with my hammer, I called a
brother--Timothy, said I, let them saddle Benedict--let them saddle my
black palfrey, and bid the Sub-Prior and some half-score of attendants
be in readiness tomorrow after matins--we would ride to
Glendearg.--Brother Timothy stared, thinking, I imagine, that his ears
had scarce done him justice--but I repeated my commands, and said, Let
the Kitchener and Refectioner go before to aid the poor vassals to
whom the place belongs in making a suitable collation. So that you
will consider, good Sir Piercie, our mutual in commodities, and
forgive whatever you may find amiss"

"By my faith," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "there is nothing to
forgive--If you spiritual warriors have to submit to the grievous
incommodities which your lordship narrates, it would ill become me, a
sinful and secular man, to complain of a bed as hard as a board, of
broth which relished as if made of burnt wool, of flesh, which, in its
sable and singed shape, seemed to put me on a level with Richard
Coeur-de-Lion,--when he ate up the head of a Moor carbonadoed, and of
other viands savouring rather of the rusticity of this northern
region."

"By the good Saints, sir," said the Abbot, somewhat touched in point
of his character for hospitality, of which he was in truth a most
faithful and zealous professor, "it grieves me to the heart that you
have found our vassals no better provided for your reception--Yet I
crave leave to observe, that if Sir Piercie Shafton's affairs had
permitted him to honour with his company our poor house of Saint
Mary's, he might have had less to complain of in respect of
easements."

"To give your lordship the reasons," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "why I
could not at this present time approach your dwelling, or avail myself
of its well-known and undoubted hospitality, craves either some delay,
or," looking around him, "a limited audience."

The Lord Abbot immediately issued his mandate to the Refectioner: "Hie
thee to the kitchen, Brother Hilarius, and there make inquiry of our
brother the Kitchener, within what time he opines that our collation
may be prepared, since sin and sorrow it were, considering the
hardships of this noble and gallant knight, no whit mentioning
or--weighing those we ourselves have endured, if we were now either to
advance or retard the hour of refection beyond the time when the
viands are fit to be set before us."

Brother Hilarius parted with an eager alertness to execute the will of
his Superior, and returned with the assurance, that punctually at one
afternoon would the collation be ready.

"Before that time," said the accurate Refectioner, "the wafers,
flamms, and pastry-meat, will scarce have had the just degree of fire
which learned pottingers prescribe as fittest for the body; and if it
should be past one o'clock, were it but ten minutes, our brother the
Kitchener opines, that the haunch of venison would suffer in spite of
the skill of the little turn-broche whom he has recommended to your
holiness by his praises."

"How!" said the Abbot, "a haunch of venison!--from whence comes that
dainty? I remember not thou didst intimate its presence in thy hamper
of vivers."

"So please your holiness and lordship," said the Refectioner, "he is a
son of the woman of the house who has shot it and sent it in--killed
but now; yet, as the animal heat hath not left the body, the Kitchener
undertakes it shall eat as tender as a young chicken--and this youth
hath a special gift in shooting deer, and never misses the heart or
the brain; so that the blood is not driven through the flesh, as
happens too often with us.  It is a hart of grease--your holiness has
seldom seen such a haunch."

"Silence, Brother Hilarius," said the Abbot, wiping his mouth; "it is
not beseeming our order to talk of food so earnestly, especially as we
must oft have our animal powers exhausted by fasting, and be
accessible (as being ever mere mortals) to those signs of longing" (he
again wiped his mouth) "which arise on the mention of victuals to an
hungry man.--Minute down, however, the name of that youth--it is
fitting merit should be rewarded, and he shall hereafter be a
_frater ad succurrendum_ in the kitchen and buttery."

"Alas! reverend Father and my good lord," replied the Refectioner, "I
did inquire after the youth, and I learn he is one who prefers the
casque to the cowl, and the sword of the flesh to the weapons of the
spirit."

"And if it be so," said the Abbot, "see that thou retain him as a
deputy-keeper and man-at-arms, and not as a lay brother of the
Monastery--for old Tallboy, our forester, waxes dim-eyed, and hath
twice spoiled a noble buck, by hitting him unwarily on the haunch. Ah!
'tis a foul fault, the abusing by evil-killing, evil-dressing,
evil-appetite, or otherwise, the good creatures indulged to us for our
use. Wherefore, secure us the service of this youth, Brother Hilarius,
in the way that may best suit him.--And now, Sir Piercie Shafton,
since the fates have assigned us a space of well-nigh an hour, ere we
dare hope to enjoy more than the vapour or savour of our repast, may I
pray you, of your courtesy, to tell me the cause of this visit; and,
above all, to inform us, why you will not approach our more pleasant
and better furnished _hospitium_?"

"Reverend Father, and my very good lord," said Sir Piercie Shafton,
"it is well known to your wisdom, that there are stone walls which
have ears, and that secrecy is to be looked to in matters which
concern a man's head." The Abbot signed to his attendants, excepting
the Sub-Prior, to leave the room, and then said, "Your valour, Sir
Piercie, may freely unburden yourself before our faithful friend and
counsellor Father Eustace, the benefits of whose advice we may too
soon lose, inasmuch as his merits will speedily recommend him to an
higher station, in which we trust he may find the blessing of a friend
and adviser as valuable as himself, since I may say of him, as our
claustral rhyme goeth,[Footnote: The rest of this doggerel rhyme may
be found in Fosbrooke's Learned work on British Monachism.]

  'Dixit Abbas ad Prioris,
  Tu es homo boni moris,
  Quia semper sanioris
  Mihi das concilia.'

Indeed," he added, "the office of Sub-Prior is altogether beneath our
dear brother; nor can we elevate him unto that of Prior, which, for
certain reasons, is at present kept vacant amongst us. Howbeit, Father
Eustace is fully possessed of my confidence, and worthy of yours, and
well may it be said of him, _Intravit in secretis nostris_."

Sir Piercie Shafton bowed to the reverend brethren, and, heaving a
sigh, as if he would burst his steel cuirass, he thus commenced his
speech:--

"Certes, reverend sirs, I may well heave such a suspiration, who have,
as it were, exchanged heaven for purgatory, leaving the lightsome
sphere of the royal court of England for a remote nook in this
inaccessible desert--quitting the tilt-yard, where I was ever ready
among my compeers to splinter a lance, either for the love of honour,
or for the honour of love, in order to couch my knightly spear against
base and pilfering besognios and marauders--exchanging the lighted
halls, wherein I used nimbly to pace the swift coranto, or to move
with a loftier grace in the stately galliard, for this rugged and
decayed dungeon of rusty-coloured stone--quitting the gay theatre, for
the solitary chimney-nook of a Scottish dog-house--bartering the
sounds of the soul-ravishing lute, and the love-awaking viol-de-gamba,
for the discordant squeak of a northern bagpipe--above all, exchanging
the smiles of those beauties, who form a gay galaxy around the throne
of England, for the cold courtesy of an untaught damsel, and the
bewildered stare of a miller's maiden. More might I say of the
exchange of the conversation of gallant knights and gay courtiers of
mine own order and capacity, whose conceits are bright and vivid as
the lightning, for that of monks and churchmen--but it were
discourteous to urge that topic."

The Abbot listened to this list of complaints with great round eyes,
which evinced no exact intelligence of the orator's meaning; and when
the knight paused to take breath, he looked with a doubtful and
inquiring eye at the Sub-Prior, not well knowing in what tone he
should reply to an exordium so extraordinary. The Sub-Prior
accordingly stepped in to the relief of his principal.

"We deeply sympathize with you, Sir Knight, in the several
mortifications and hardships to which fate has subjected you,
particularly in that which has thrown you into the society of those,
who, as they were conscious they deserved not such an honour, so
neither did they at all desire it. But all this goes little way to
expound the cause of this train of disasters, or, in plainer words,
the reason which has compelled you into a situation having so few
charms for you."

"Gentle and reverend sir," replied the knight, "forgive an unhappy
person, who, in giving a history of his miseries, dilateth upon them
extremely, even as he who, having fallen from a precipice, looketh
upward to measure the height from which he hath been precipitated."

"Yea, but," said Father Eustace, "methinks it were wiser in him to tell
those who come to lift him up, which of his bones have been broken."

"You, reverend sir," said the knight, "have, in the encounter of our
wits, made a fair attaint; whereas I may be in some sort said to have
broken my staff across. [Footnote: _Attaint_ was a term of
tilting used to express the champion's having _attained_ his
mark, or, in other words, struck his lance straight and fair against
the helmet or breast of his adversary. Whereas to break the lance
across, intimated a total failure in directing the point of the weapon
on the object of his aim.] Pardon me, grave sir, that I speak in the
language of the tilt-yard, which is doubtless strange to your reverend
years.--Ah! brave resort of the noble, the fair and the gay!--Ah!
throne of love, and citadel of honour!--Ah! celestial beauties, by
whose bright eyes it is graced!  Never more shall Piercie Shafton
advance, as the centre of your radiant glances, couch his lance, and
spur his horse at the sound of the spirit-stirring trumpets, nobly
called the voice of war--never more shall he baffle his adversary's
encounter boldly, break his spear dexterously, and ambling around the
lovely circle, receive the rewards with which beauty honours
chivalry!"

Here he paused, wrung his hands, looked upwards, and seemed lost in
contemplation of his own fallen fortunes.

"Mad, very mad," whispered the Abbot to the Sub-Prior; "I would we
were fairly rid of him; for, of a truth, I expect he will proceed from
raving to mischief--Were it not better to call up the rest of the
brethren?"

But the Sub-Prior knew better than his Superior how to distinguish the
jargon of affectation from the ravings of insanity, and although the
extremity of the knight's passion seemed altogether fantastic, yet he
was not ignorant to what extravagancies the fashion of the day can
conduct its votaries.

Allowing, therefore, two minutes' space to permit the knight's
enthusiastic feelings to exhaust themselves, he again gravely reminded
him that the Lord Abbot had taken a journey, unwonted to his age and
habits, solely to learn in what he could serve Sir Piercie
Shafton--that it was altogether impossible he could do so without his
receiving distinct information of the situation in which he had now
sought refuge in Scotland.--"The day wore on," he observed, looking at
the window; "and if the Abbot should be obliged to return to the
Monastery without obtaining the necessary intelligence, the regret
might be mutual, but the inconvenience was like to be all on Sir
Piercie's own side."

The hint was not thrown away.

"O, goddess of courtesy!" said the knight, "can I so far have
forgotten thy behests as to make this good prelate's ease and time a
sacrifice to my vain complaints! Know, then, most worthy, and not less
worshipful, that I, your poor visitor and guest, am by birth nearly
bound to the Piercie of Northumberland, whose fame is so widely blown
through all parts of the world where English worth hath been known.
Now, this present Earl of Northumberland, of whom I propose to give
you the brief history----"

"It is altogether unnecessary," said the Abbot; "we know him to be a
good and true nobleman, and a sworn upholder of our Catholic faith, in
the spite of the heretical woman who now sits upon the throne of
England.  And it is specially as his kinsman, and as knowing that ye
partake with him in such devout and faithful belief and adherence to
our holy Mother Church, that we say to you, Sir Piercie Shafton, that
ye be heartily welcome to us, and that, and we wist how, we would
labour to do you good service in your extremity."

"For such kind offer I rest your most humble debtor," said Sir
Piercie, "nor need I at this moment say more than that my Right
Honourable Cousin of Northumberland, having devised with me and some
others, the choice and picked spirits of the age, how and by what
means the worship of God, according to the Catholic Church, might be
again introduced into this distracted kingdom of England, (even as one
deviseth, by the assistance of his friend, to catch and bridle a
runaway steed,) it pleased him so deeply to intrust me in those
communications, that my personal safety becomes, as it were, entwined
or complicated therewith. Natheless, as we have had sudden reason to
believe, this Princess Elizabeth, who maintaineth around her a sort of
counsellors skilful in tracking whatever schemes may be pursued for
bringing her title into challenge, or for erecting again the
discipline of the Catholic Church, has obtained certain knowledge of
the trains which we had laid before we could give fire unto them.
Wherefore, my Right Honourable Cousin of Northumberland, thinking it
best belike that one man should take both blame and shame for the
whole, did lay the burden of all this trafficking upon my back; which
load I am the rather content to bear, in that he hath always shown
himself my kind and honourable kinsman, as well as that my estate, I
wot not how, hath of late been somewhat insufficient to maintain the
expense of those braveries, wherewith it is incumbent on us, who are
chosen and selected spirits, to distinguish ourselves from the
vulgar."

"So that possibly," said the Sub-Prior, "your private affairs rendered a
foreign journey less incommodious to you than it might have been to the
noble earl, your right worthy cousin?"

"You are right, reverend sir," answered the courtier; "_rem
acu_--you have touched the point with a needle--My cost and
expenses had been indeed somewhat lavish at the late triumphs and
tourneys, and the flat-capp'd citizens had shown themselves unwilling
to furnish my pocket for new gallantries for the honour of the nation,
as well as for mine own peculiar glory--and, to speak truth, it was in
some part the hope of seeing these matters amended that led me to
desire a new world in England."

"So that the miscarriage of your public enterprise, with the
derangement of your own private affairs," said the Sub-Prior, "have
induced you to seek Scotland as a place of refuge?"

"_Rem acu_, once again," said Sir Piercie; and not without good
cause, since my neck, if I remained, might have been brought within
the circumstances of a halter--and so speedy was my journey northward,
that I had but time to exchange my peach-coloured doublet of Genoa
velvet, thickly laid over with goldsmith's work, for this cuirass,
which was made by Bonamico of Milan, and travelled northward with all
speed, judging that I might do well to visit my Right Honourable
Cousin of Northumberland, at one of his numerous castles. But as I
posted towards Alnwick, even with the speed of a star, which, darting
from its native sphere, shoots wildly downwards, I was met at
Northallerton by one Henry Vaughan, a servant of my right honourable
kinsman, who showed me, that as then I might not with safety come to
his presence, seeing that, in obedience to orders from his court, he
was obliged to issue out letters for my incarceration."

"This," said the Abbot, "seems but hard measure on the part of your
honourable kinsman."

"It might be so judged, my lord," replied Sir Piercie; "nevertheless,
I will stand to the death for the honour of my Right Honourable Cousin
of Northumberland. Also, Henry Vaughan gave me, from my said cousin, a
good horse, and a purse of gold, with two Border-prickers, as they are
called, for my guides, who conducted me, by such roads and by-paths as
have never been seen since the days of Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristrem,
into this kingdom of Scotland, and to the house of a certain baron, or
one who holds the style of such, called Julian Avenel, with whom I
found such reception as the place and party could afford."

"And that," said the Abbot, "must have been right wretched; for to
judge from the appetite which Julian showeth when abroad, he hath not, I
judge, over-abundant provision at home."

"You are right, sir--your reverence is in the right," continued Sir
Piercie; "we had but lenten fare, and, what was worse, a score to
clear at the departure; for though this Julian Avenel called us to no
reckoning, yet he did so extravagantly admire the fashion of my
poniard--the _poignet_ being of silver exquisitely hatched, and
indeed the weapon being altogether a piece of exceeding rare device
and beauty--that in faith I could not for very shame's sake but pray
his acceptance of it; words which he gave me not the trouble of
repeating twice, before he had stuck it into his greasy buff-belt,
where, credit me, reverend sir, it showed more like a butcher's knife
than a gentleman's dagger."

"So goodly a gift might at least have purchased you a few days'
hospitality," said Father Eustace.

"Reverend sir," said Sir Piercie, "had I abidden with him, I should
have been complimented out of every remnant of my wardrobe--actually
flayed, by the hospitable gods I swear it! Sir, he secured my spare
doublet, and had a pluck at my galligaskins--I was enforced to beat a
retreat before I was altogether unrigged. That Border knave, his
serving man, had a pluck at me too, and usurped a scarlet cassock and
steel cuirass belonging to the page of my body, whom I was fain to
leave behind me. In good time I received a letter from my Right
Honourable Cousin, showing me that he had written to you in my behalf,
and sent to your charge two mails filled with wearing apparel--namely,
my rich crimson silk doublet, slashed out and lined with cloth of
gold, which I wore at the last revels, with baldric and trimmings to
correspond--also two pair black silk slops, with hanging garters of
carnation silk--also the flesh-coloured silken doublet, with the
trimmings of fur, in which I danced the salvage man at the Gray's-Inn
mummery--also----"

"Sir Knight," said the Sub-Prior, "I pray you to spare the farther
inventory of your wardrobe. The monks of Saint Mary's are no
free-booting barons, and whatever part of your vestments arrived at
our house, have been this day faithfully brought hither, with the
mails which contained them. I may presume from what has been said, as
we have indeed been, given to understand by the Earl of
Northumberland, that your desire is to remain for the present as
unknown and as unnoticed, as may be consistent with your high worth
and distinction?"

"Alas, reverend father!" replied the courtier, "a blade when it is in
the scabbard cannot give lustre, a diamond when it is in the casket
cannot give light, and worth, when it is compelled by circumstances to
obscure itself, cannot draw observation--my retreat can only attract
the admiration of those few to whom circumstances permit its
displaying itself."

"I conceive now, my venerable father and lord," said the Sub-Prior,
"that your wisdom will assign such a course of conduct to this noble
knight, as may be alike consistent with his safety, and with the weal
of the community.  For you wot well, that perilous strides have been
made in these audacious days, to the destruction of all ecclesiastical
foundations, and that our holy community has been repeatedly menaced.
Hitherto they have found no flaw in our raiment; but a party, friendly
as well to the Queen of England, as to the heretical doctrines of the
schismatical church, or even to worse and wilder forms of heresy,
prevails now at the court of our sovereign, who dare not yield to her
suffering clergy the protection she would gladly extend to them."

"My lord, and reverend sir," said the knight, "I will gladly relieve
you of my presence, while ye canvass this matter at your freedom; and
to speak truly, I am desirous to see in what case the chamberlain of
my noble kinsman hath found my wardrobe, and how he hath packed the
same, and whether it has suffered from the journey--there are four
suits of as pure and elegant device as ever the fancy of a fair lady
doated upon, every one having a treble, and appropriate change of
ribbons, trimmings, and fringes, which, in case of need, may as it
were renew each of them, and multiply the four into twelve.--There is
also my sad-coloured riding-suit, and three cut-work shirts with
falling bands--I pray you, pardon me--I must needs see how matters
stand with them without farther dallying."

Thus speaking, he left the room; and the Sub-Prior, looking after him
significantly, added, "Where the treasure is will the heart be also."

"Saint Mary preserve our wits!" said the Abbot, stunned with the
knight's abundance of words; "were man's brains ever so stuffed with
silk and broadcloth, cut-work, and I wot not what besides! And what
could move the Earl of Northumberland to assume for his bosom
counsellor, in.  matters of death and danger, such a feather-brained
coxcomb as this?"

"Had he been other than what he is, venerable father," said the
Sub-Prior, "he had been less fitted for the part of scape-goat, to which
his Right Honourable Cousin had probably destined him from the
commencement, in case of their plot failing. I know something of this
Piercie Shafton. The legitimacy of his mother's descent from the
Piercie family, the point on which he is most jealous, hath been
called in question. If hairbrained courage, and an outrageous spirit
of gallantry, can make good his pretensions to the high lineage he
claims, these qualities have never been denied him. For the rest, he
is one of the ruffling gallants of the time, like Howland Yorke,
Stukely,

[Footnote: "Yorke," says Camden, "was a Londoner, a man of
loose and dissolute behaviour, and desperately audacious--famous in
his time amongst the common bullies and swaggerers, as being the first
that, to the great admiration of many at his boldness, brought into
England the bold and dangerous way of fencing with the rapier in
duelling. Whereas, till that time, the English used to fight with long
swords and bucklers, striking with the edge, and thought it no part of
man either to push or strike beneath the girdle.

Having a command in the Low Countries, Yorke revolted to the
Spaniards, and died miserably, poisoned, as was supposed, by his new
allies. Three years afterwards, his bones were dug up and gibbeted by
the command of the States of Holland.

Thomas Stukely, another distinguished gallant of the time, was bred a
merchant, being the son of a rich clothier in the west. He wedded the
daughter and heiress of a wealthy alderman of London, named Curtis,
after whose death he squandered the riches he thus acquired in all
manner of extravagance. His wife, whose fortune supplied his waste,
represented to him that he ought to make more of her. Stukely replied,
"I will make as much of thee, believe me, as it is possible for any to
do;" and he kept his word in one sense, having stripped her even of
her wearing apparel, before he finally ran away from her.

Having fled to Italy, he contrived to impose upon the Pope, with a
plan of invading Ireland, for which he levied soldiers, and made some
preparations, but ended by engaging himself and his troops in the
service of King Sebastian of Portugal. He sailed with that prince on
his fatal voyage to Barbary, and fell with him at the battle of
Alcazar.

Stukely, as one of the first gallants of the time, has had the honour
to be chronicled in song, in Evans' Old Ballads, vol. iii, edition
1810. His fate is also introduced in a tragedy, by George Peel, as has
been supposed, called the Battle of Alcazar, from which play Dryden is
alleged to have taken the idea of Don Sebastian; if so, it is
surprising he omitted a character so congenial to King Charles the
Second's time as the witty, brave, and profligate Thomas Stukely.]

and others, who wear out their fortunes, and endanger their lives, in
idle braveries, in order that they may be esteemed the only choice
gallants of the time; and afterwards endeavour to repair their
estate, by engaging in the desperate plots and conspiracies which
wiser heads have devised. To use one of his own conceited similitudes,
such courageous fools resemble hawks, which the wiser conspirator
keeps hooded and blinded on his wrist until the quarry is on the wing,
and who are then flown at them."

"Saint Mary," said the Abbot, "he were an evil guest to introduce into
our quiet household. Our young monks make bustle enough, and more than
is beseeming God's servants, about their outward attire already--this
knight were enough to turn their brains, from the _Vestiarius_
down to the very scullion boy."

"A worse evil might follow," said the Sub-Prior: "in these bad days,
the patrimony of the church is bought and sold, forfeited and
distrained, as if it were the unhallowed soil appertaining to a
secular baron. Think what penalty awaits us, were we convicted of
harbouring a rebel to her whom they call the Queen of England! There
would neither be wanting Scottish parasites to beg the lands of the
foundation, nor an army from England to burn and harry the Halidome.
The men of Scotland were once Scotsmen, firm and united in the love of
their country, and throwing every other consideration aside when the
frontier was menaced--now they are--what shall I call them--the one
part French, the other part English, considering their dear native
country merely as a prize-fighting stage, upon which foreigners are
welcome to decide their quarrels."

"Benedictine!" replied the Abbot, "they are indeed slippery and evil
times."

"And therefore," said Father Eustace, "we must walk warily--we must
not, for example, bring this man--this Sir Piercie Shafton, to our
house of Saint Mary's."

"But how then shall we dispose of him?" replied the Abbot; "bethink
thee that he is a sufferer for holy Church's sake--that his patron,
the Earl of Northumberland, hath been our friend, and that, lying so
near us, he may work us weal or wo according as we deal with his
kinsman."

"And, accordingly," said the Sub-Prior, "for these reasons, as well as
for discharge of the great duty of Christian charity, I would protect
and relieve this man. Let him not go back to Julian Avenel--that
unconscientious baron would not stick to plunder the exiled
stranger--Let him remain here--the spot is secluded, and if the
accommodation be beneath his quality, discovery will become the less
likely. We will make such means for his convenience as we can devise."

"Will he be persuaded, thinkest thou?" said the Abbot; "I will leave
my own travelling bed for his repose, and send up a suitable
easy-chair."

"With such easements," said the Sub-Prior, "he must not complain; and
then, if threatened by any sudden danger, he can soon come down to the
sanctuary, where we will harbour him in secret until means can be
devised of dismissing him in safety."

"Were we not better," said the Abbot, "send him on to the court, and
get rid of him at once?"

"Ay, but at the expense of our friends--this butterfly may fold his
wings, and lie under cover in the cold air of Glendearg; but were he
at Holyrood, he would, did his life depend on it, expand his spangled
drapery in the eyes of the queen and court--Rather than fail of
distinction, he would sue for love to our gracious sovereign--the eyes
of all men would be upon him in the course of three short days, and
the international peace of the two ends of the island endangered for a
creature, who, like a silly moth, cannot abstain from fluttering round
a light."

"Thou hast prevailed with me, Father Eustace," said the Abbot, "and it
will go hard but I improve on thy plan--I will send up in secret, not
only household stuff, but wine and wassell-bread. There is a young
swankie here who shoots venison well. I will give him directions to
see that the knight lacks none."

"Whatever accommodation he can have, which infers not a risk of
discovery," said the Sub-Prior, "it is our duty to afford him."

"Nay," said the Abbot, "we will do more, and will instantly despatch a
servant express to the keeper of our revestiary to send us such things
as he may want, even this night. See it done, good father."

"I will," answered Father Eustace; "but I hear the gull clamorous for
some one to truss his points.[Footnote: The points were the strings of
cord or ribbon, (so called, because _pointed_ with metal like the
laces of women's stays,) which attached the doublet to the hose. They
were very numerous, and required assistance to tie them properly,
which was called _trussing_.] He will be fortunate if he lights
on any one here who can do him the office of groom of the chamber."

"I would he would appear," said the Abbot, "for here comes the
Refectioner with the collation--By my faith, the ride hath given me a
sharp appetite!"

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Seventeenth.


  I'll seek for other aid--Spirits, they say,
  Flit round invisible, as thick as motes
  Dance in the sunbeam. If that spell
  Or necromancer's sigil can compel them,
  They shall hold council with me.
                JAMES DUFF.

The reader's attention must be recalled to Halbert Glendinning, who had
left the Tower of Glendearg immediately after his quarrel with its new
guest, Sir Piercie Shafton. As he walked with a rapid pace up the glen,
Old Martin followed him, beseeching him to be less hasty.

"Halbert," said the old man, "you will never live to have white hair, if
you take fire thus at every spark of provocation."

"And why should I wish it, old man," said Halbert, "if I am to be the
butt that every fool may aim a shaft of scorn against?--What avails
it, old man, that you yourself move, sleep, and wake, eat thy niggard
meal, and repose on thy hard pallet?--Why art thou so well pleased
that the morning should call thee up to daily toil, and the evening
again lay thee down a wearied-out wretch? Were it not better sleep and
wake no more, than to undergo this dull exchange of labour for
insensibility and of insensibility for labour?"

"God help me," answered Martin, "there may be truth in what thou
sayest--but walk slower, for my old limbs cannot keep pace with your
young legs--walk slower, and I will tell you why age, though unlovely,
is yet endurable."

"Speak on then," said Halbert, slackening his pace, "but remember we
must seek venison to refresh the fatigues of these holy men, who will
this morning have achieved a journey of ten miles; and if we reach not
the Brocksburn head we are scarce like to see an antler."

"Then know, my good Halbert," said Martin, "whom I love as my own son,
that I am satisfied to live till death calls me, because my Maker
wills it. Ay, and although I spend what men call a hard life, pinched
with cold in winter, and burnt with heat in summer, though I feed hard
and sleep hard, and am held mean and despised, yet I bethink me, that
were I of no use on the face of this fair creation, God would withdraw
me from it."

"Thou poor old man," said Halbert, "and can such a vain conceit as
this of thy fancied use, reconcile thee to a world where thou playest
so poor a part?"

"My part was nearly as poor," said Martin, "my person nearly as much
despised, the day that I saved my mistress and her child from
perishing in the wilderness."

"Right, Martin," answered Halbert; "there, indeed, thou didst what
might be a sufficient apology for a whole life of insignificance."

"And do you account it for nothing, Halbert, that I should have the
power of giving you a lesson of patience, and submission to the
destinies of Providence? Methinks there is use for the grey hairs on
the old scalp, were it but to instruct the green head by precept and
by example."

Halbert held down his face, and remained silent for a minute or two, and
then resumed his discourse: "Martin, seest thou aught changed in me of
late?"

"Surely," said Martin. "I have always known you hasty, wild, and
inconsiderate, rude, and prompt to speak at the volley and without
reflection; but now, methinks, your bearing, without losing its
natural fire, has something in it of force and dignity which it had
not before. It seems as if you had fallen asleep a carle, and awakened
a gentleman."

"Thou canst judge, then, of noble bearing?" said Halbert.

"Surely," answered Martin, "in some sort I can; for I have travelled
through court, and camp, and city, with my master, Walter Avenel,
although he could do nothing for me in the long run, but give me room
for two score of sheep on the hill--and surely even now, while I speak
with you, I feel sensible that my language is more refined than it is
my wont to use, and that--though I know not the reason--the rude
northern dialect, so familiar to my tongue, has given place to a more
town-bred speech."

"And this change in thyself and me, thou canst by no means account
for?" said young Glendinning.

"Change!" replied Martin, "by our Lady it is not so much a change
which I feel, as a recalling and renewing sentiments and expressions
which I had some thirty years since, ere Tibb and I set up our humble
household.  It is singular, that your society should have this sort of
influence over me, Halbert, and that I should never have experienced
it ere now."

"Thinkest thou," said Halbert, "thou seest in me aught that can raise
me from this base, low, despised state, into one where I may rank with
those proud men, who now despise my clownish poverty?"

Martin paused an instant, and then answered, "Doubtless you may,
Halbert; as broken a ship has come to land. Heard ye never of Hughie
Dun, who left this Halidome some thirty-five years gone by? A
deliverly fellow was Hughie--could read and write like a priest, and
could wield brand and buckler with the best of the riders. I mind
him--the like of him was never seen in the Halidome of Saint Mary's,
and so was seen of the preferment that God sent him."

"And what was that?" said Halbert, his eyes sparkling with eagerness.

"Nothing less," answered Martin, "than body-servant to the Archbishop
of Saint Andrews!"

Halbert's countenance fell.--"A servant--and to a priest? Was this all
that knowledge and activity could raise him to?"

Martin, in his turn, looked with wistful surprise in the face of his
young friend. "And to what could fortune lead him farther?" answered
he.  "The son of a kirk-feuar is not the stuff that lords and knights
are made of. Courage and school craft cannot change churl's blood into
gentle blood, I trow. I have heard, forby, that Hughie Dun left a good
five hundred punds of Scots money to his only daughter, and that she
married the Bailie of Pittenweem."

At this moment, and while Halbert was embarrassed with devising a
suitable answer, a deer bounded across their path. In an instant the
crossbow was at the youth's shoulder, the bolt whistled, and the deer,
after giving one bound upright, dropt dead on the green sward.

"There lies the venison our dame wanted," said Martin; "who would have
thought of an out-lying stag being so low down the glen at this
season?--And it is a hart of grease too, in full season, and three
inches of fat on the brisket. Now this is all your luck, Halbert, that
follows you, go where you like. Were you to put in for it, I would
warrant you were made one of the Abbot's yeoman-prickers, and ride
about in a purple doublet as bold as the best."

"Tush, man," answered Halbert, "I will serve the Queen or no one.
Take thou care to have down the venison to the Tower, since they
expect it.  I will on to the moss. I have two or three bird-bolts at
my girdle, and it may be I shall find wild-fowl."

He hastened his pace, and was soon out of sight. Martin paused for a
moment, and looked after him. "There goes the making of a right
gallant stripling, an ambition have not the spoiling of him--Serve the
Queen! said he. By my faith, and she hath worse servants, from all
that I e'er heard of him. And wherefore should he not keep a high
head? They that ettle to the top of the ladder will at least get up
some rounds. They that mint [Footnote: _Mint_--aim at.] at a gown
of gold, will always get a sleeve of it. But come, sir, (addressing
the stag,) you shall go to Glendearg on my two legs somewhat more
slowly than you were frisking it even now on your own four nimble
shanks. Nay, by my faith, if you be so heavy, I will content me with
the best of you, and that's the haunch and the nombles, and e'en heave
up the rest on the old oak-tree yonder, and come back for it with one
of the yauds." [Footnote: _Yauds_--horses; more particularly
horses of labour.]

While Martin returned to Glendearg with the venison, Halbert
prosecuted his walk, breathing more easily since he was free of his
companion. "The domestic of a proud and lazy priest--body-squire to
the Archbishop of Saint Andrews," he repeated to himself; "and this,
with the privilege of allying his blood with the Bailie of Pittenween,
is thought a preferment worth a brave man's struggling for;--nay more,
a preferment which, if allowed, should crown the hopes, past, present,
and to come, of the son of a Kirk-vassal! By Heaven, but that I find
in me a reluctance to practise their acts of nocturnal rapine, I would
rather take the jack and lance, and join with the Border-riders.
--Something I will do. Here, degraded and dishonoured, I will not live
the scorn of each whiffling stranger from the South, because,
forsooth, he wears tinkling spurs on a tawney boot. This thing--this
phantom, be it what it will, I will see it once more.  Since I spoke
with her, and touched her hand, thoughts and feelings have dawned on
me, of which my former life had not even dreamed; but shall I, who
feel my father's glen too narrow for my expanding spirit, brook to be
bearded in it by this vain gewgaw of a courtier, and in the sight too
of Mary Avenel? I will not stoop to it, by Heaven!"

As he spoke thus, he arrived in the sequestered glen of
Corri-nan-shian, as it verged upon the hour of noon. A few moments he
remained looking upon the fountain, and doubting in his own mind with
what countenance the White Lady might receive him. She had not indeed
expressly forbidden his again evoking her; but yet there was something
like such a prohibition implied in the farewell, which recommended him
to wait for another guide.

Halbert Glendinning did not long, however, allow himself to pause.
Hardihood was the natural characteristic of his mind; and under the
expansion and modification which his feelings had lately undergone, it
had been augmented rather than diminished. He drew his sword, undid
the buskin from his foot, bowed three times with deliberation towards
the fountain, and as often towards the tree, and repeated the same
rhyme as formerly,--

  "Thrice to the holy brake--
    Thrice to the well:--
  I bid thee awake,
    White Maid of Avenel!

  Noon gleams on the lake--
    Noon glows on the fell--
  Wake thee, O wake,
    White Maid of Avenel!"

His eye was on the holly bush as he spoke the last line; and it was
not without an involuntary shuddering that he saw the air betwixt his
eye and that object become more dim, and condense, as it were, into
the faint appearance of a form, through which, however, so thin and
transparent was the first appearance of the phantom, he could discern
the outline of the bush, as through a veil of fine crape. But,
gradually, it darkened into a more substantial appearance, and the
White Lady stood before him with displeasure on her brow. She spoke,
and her speech was still song, or rather measured chant; but, as if
now more familiar, it flowed occasionally in modulated blank-verse,
and at other times in the lyrical measure which she had used at their
former meeting.

  "This is the day when the fairy kind
    Sits weeping alone for their hopeless lot,
  And the wood-maiden sighs to the sighing wind,
    And the mer-maiden weeps in her crystal grot:
  For this is the day that a deed was wrought,
    In which we have neither part nor share.
  For the children of clay was salvation bought,
    But not for the forms of sea or air!
  And ever the mortal is most forlorn.
    Who meeteth our race on the Friday morn."

"Spirit," said Halbert Glendinning, boldly, "it is bootless to
threaten.  one who holds his life at no rate. Thine anger can but
slay; nor do I think thy power extendeth, or thy will stretcheth, so
far. The terrors which your race produce upon others, are vain against
me. My heart is hardened against fear, as by a sense of despair. If I
am, as thy words infer, of a race more peculiarly the care of Heaven
than thine, it is mine to call, it must be thine to answer. I am the
nobler being."

As he spoke, the figure looked upon him with a fierce and ireful
countenance, which, without losing the similitude of that which it
usually exhibited, had a wilder and more exaggerated cast of features.
The eyes seemed to contract and become more fiery, and slight
convulsions passed over the face, as if it was about to be transformed
into something hideous.  The whole appearance resembled those faces
which the imagination summons up when it is disturbed by laudanum, but
which do not remain under the visionary's command, and, beautiful in
their first appearance, become wild and grotesque ere we can arrest
them.

But when Halbert had concluded his bold speech, the White Lady stood
before him with the same pale, fixed, and melancholy aspect, which she
usually bore. He had expected the agitation which she exhibited would
conclude in some frightful metamorphosis. Folding her arms on her
bosom, the phantom replied,--

  "Daring youth! for thee it is well,
  Here calling me in haunted dell,
  That thy heart has not quail'd,
       Nor thy courage fail'd,
       And that thou couldst brook
  The angry look
       Of Her of Avenel.

  Did one limb shiver,
       Or an eyelid quiver,
  Thou wert lost for ever.
  Though I am form'd from the ether blue,
  And my blood is of the unfallen dew.
       And thou art framed of mud and dust,
  'Tis thine to speak, reply I must."

"I demand of thee, then," said the youth, "by what charm it is that I
am thus altered in mind and in wishes--that I think no longer of deer
or dog, of bow or bolt--that my soul spurns the bounds of this obscure
glen--that my blood boils at an insult from one by whose stirrup I
would some days since have run for a whole summer's morn, contented
and honoured by the notice of a single word? Why do I now seek to mate
me with princes, and knights, and nobles?--Am I the same, who but
yesterday, as it were, slumbered in contented obscurity, but who am
to-day awakened to glory and ambition?--Speak--tell me, if thou canst,
the meaning of this change?--Am I spell-bound?--or have I till now
been under the influence of a spell, that I feel as another being, yet
am conscious of remaining the same? Speak and tell me, is it to thy
influence that the change is owing?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "A mightier wizard far than I
    Wields o'er the universe his power;
  Him owns the eagle in the sky,
    The turtle in the bower.
  Chanceful in shape, yet mightiest still,
  He wields the heart of man at will,
  From ill to good, from good, to ill,
  In cot and castle-tower."

"Speak not thus darkly," said the youth, colouring so deeply, that face,
neck, and hands were in a sanguine glow; "make me sensible of thy
purpose."

The spirit answered,--

  "Ask thy heart,--whose secret cell
  Is fill'd with Marv Avenel!
  Ask thy pride,--why scornful look
  In Mary's view it will not brook?
  Ask it, why thou seek'st to rise
  Among the mighty and the wise?--
  Why thou spurn'st thy lowly lot?--
  Why thy pastimes are forgot?
  Why thou wouldst in bloody strife
  Mend thy luck or lose thy life?
  Ask thy heart, and it shall tell,
  Sighing from its secret cell,
  'Tis for Mary Avenel."

"Tell me, then," said Halbert, his cheek still deeply crimsoned, "thou
who hast said to me that which I dared not say to myself, by what means
shall I urge my passion--by what means make it known?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "Do not ask me;
  On doubts like these thou canst not task me.
  We only see the passing show
  Of human passions' ebb and flow;
  And view the pageant's idle glance
  As mortals eye the northern dance,
  When thousand streamers, flashing bright,
  Career it o'er the brow of night.
  And gazers mark their changeful gleams,
  But feel no influence from their beams."

"Yet thine own fate," replied Halbert, "unless men greatly err, is
linked with that of mortals?"

The phantom answered,

  "By ties mysterious link'd, our fated race
  Holds strange connexion with the sons of men.
  The star that rose upon the House of Avenel,
  When Norman Ulric first assumed the name,
  That star, when culminating in its orbit,
  Shot from its sphere a drop of diamond dew,
  And this bright font received it--and a Spirit
  Rose from the fountain, and her date of life
  Hath co-existence with the House of Avenel,
  And with the star that rules it."

"Speak yet more plainly," answered young Glendinning; "of this I can
understand nothing. Say, what hath forged thy wierded [Footnote:
_Wierded_--fated.] link of destiny with the House of Avenel?
Say, especially, what fate now overhangs that house?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "Look on my girdle--on this thread of gold--
  'Tis fine as web of lightest gossamer.
  And, but there is a spell on't, would not bind,
  Light as they are, the folds of my thin robe.
  But when 'twas donn'd, it was a massive chain,
  Such as might bind the champion of the Jews,

  Even when his looks were longest--it hath dwindled,
  Hath minish'd in its substance and its strength,
  As sunk the greatness of the House of Avenel.
  When this frail thread gives way. I to the elements
  Resign the principles of life they lent me.
  Ask me no more of this!--the stars forbid it."

"Then canst thou read the stars," answered the youth; "and mayest
tell me the fate of my passion, if thou canst not aid it?"

The White Lady again replied,--

  "Dim burns the once bright star of Avenel,
  Dim as the beacon when the morn is nigh,
  And the o'er-wearied warder leaves the light-house;
  There is an influence sorrowful and fearful.
  That dogs its downward course. Disastrous passion,
  Fierce hate and rivalry, are in the aspect
  That lowers upon its fortunes."

"And rivalry?" repeated Glendinning; "it is, then, as I feared!--But
shall that English silkworm presume to beard me in my father's house,
and in the presence of Mary Avenel?--Give me to meet him, spirit--give
me to do away the vain distinction of rank on which he refuses me the
combat.  Place us on equal terms, and gleam the stars with what aspect
they will, the sword of my father shall control their influences."

She answered as promptly as before,--

  "Complain not of me, child of clay,
  If to thy harm I yield the way.
  We, who soar thy sphere above,
  Know not aught of hate or love;
  As will or wisdom rules thy mood,
  My gifts to evil turn, or good."

"Give me to redeem my honour," said Halbert Glendinning--"give me to
retort on my proud rival the insults he has thrown on me, and let the
rest fare as it will. If I cannot revenge my wrong, I shall sleep
quiet, and know nought of my disgrace."

The phantom failed not to reply,--

  "When Piercie Shafton boasteth high,
  Let this token meet his eye.
  The sun is westering from the dell,
  Thy wish is granted--fare thee well!"

As the White Lady spoke or chanted these last words, she undid from
her locks a silver bodkin around which they were twisted, and gave it
to Halbert Glendinning; then shaking her dishevelled hair till it fell
like a veil around her, the outlines of her form gradually became as
diffuse as her flowing tresses, her countenance grew pale as the moon
in her first quarter, her features became indistinguishable, and she
melted into the air.

Habit inures us to wonders; but the youth did not find himself alone
by the fountain without experiencing, though in a much less degree,
the revulsion of spirits which he had felt upon the phantom's former
disappearance.  A doubt strongly pressed upon his mind, whether it
were safe to avail himself of the gifts of a spirit which did not even
pretend to belong to the class of angels, and might, for aught he
knew, have a much worse lineage than that which she was pleased to
avow. "I will speak of it," he said, "to Edward, who is clerkly
learned, and will tell me what I should do. And yet, no--Edward is
scrupulous and wary.--I will prove the effect of her gift on Sir
Piercie Shafton, if he again braves me, and by the issue, I will be
myself a sufficient judge whether there is danger in resorting to her
counsel. Home, then, home--and we shall soon learn whether that home
shall longer hold me; for not again will I brook insult, with my
father's sword by my side, and Mary for the spectator of my disgrace."




Chapter the Eighteenth.


  I give thee eighteenpence a-day,
    And my bow shall thou bear,
  And over all the north country,
    I make thee the chief rydere.
  And I thirteenpence a-day, quoth the queen,
    By God and by my faye,
  Come fetch thy payment when thou wilt,
    No man shall say thee nay.
              WILLIAM OF CLOUDESLEY.

The manners of the age did not permit the inhabitants of Glendearg to
partake of the collation which was placed in the spence of that
ancient tower, before the Lord Abbot and his attendants, and Sir
Piercie Shafton.  Dame Glendinning was excluded, both by inferiority
of rank and by sex, for (though it was a rule often neglected) the
Superior of Saint Mary's was debarred from taking his meals in female
society. To Mary Avenel the latter, and to Edward Glendinning the
former, incapacity attached; but it pleased his lordship to require
their presence in the apartment, and to say sundry kind words to them
upon the ready and hospitable reception which they had afforded him.

The smoking haunch now stood upon the table; a napkin, white as snow,
was, with due reverence, tucked under the chin of the Abbot by the
Refectioner; and nought was wanting to commence the repast, save the
presence of Sir Piercie Shafton, who at length appeared, glittering
like the sun, in a carnation-velvet doublet, slashed and puffed out
with cloth of silver, his hat of the newest block, surrounded by a
hatband of goldsmith's work, while around his neck he wore a collar of
gold, set with rubies and topazes so rich, that it vindicated his
anxiety for the safety of his baggage from being founded upon his love
of mere finery. This gorgeous collar or chain, resembling those worn
by the knights of the highest orders of chivalry, fell down on his
breast, and terminated in a medallion.

"We waited for Sir Piercie Shafton," said the Abbot, hastily assuming
his place in the great chair which the Kitchener advanced to the table
with ready hand.

"I pray your pardon, reverend father, and my good lord," replied that
pink of courtesy; "I did but wait to cast my riding slough, and to
transmew myself into some civil form meeter for this worshipful
company."

"I cannot but praise your gallantry, Sir Knight," said the Abbot, "and
your prudence, also, for choosing the fitting time to appear thus
adorned.  Certes, had that goodly chain been visible in some part of
your late progress, there was risk that the lawful owner might have
parted company therewith."

"This chain, said your reverence?" answered Sir Piercie; "surely it is
but a toy, a trifle, a slight thing which shows but poorly with this
doublet--marry, when I wear that of the murrey-coloured double-piled
Genoa velvet, puffed out with ciprus, the gems, being relieved and set
off by the darker and more grave ground of the stuff, show like stars
giving a lustre through dark clouds."

"I nothing doubt it," said the Abbot, "but I pray you to sit down at the
board."

But Sir Piercie had now got into his element, and was not easily
interrupted--"I own," he continued, "that slight as the toy is, it
might perchance have had some captivation for Julian--Santa Maria!"
said he, interrupting himself; "what was I about to say, and my fair
and beauteous Protection, or shall I rather term her my Discretion,
here in presence!--Indiscreet hath it been in your Affability, O most
lovely Discretion, to suffer a stray word to have broke out of the
penfold of his mouth, that might overleap the fence of civility, and
trespass on the manor of decorum."

"Marry!" said the Abbot, somewhat impatiently, "the greatest
discretion that I can see in the matter is, to eat our victuals being
hot--Father Eustace, say the Benedicite, and cut up the haunch."

The Sub-Prior readily obeyed the first part of the Abbot's injunction,
but paused upon the second--"It is Friday, most reverend," he said in
Latin, desirous that the hint should escape, if possible, the ears of
the stranger.

"We are travellers," said the Abbot, in reply, "and _viatoribus
licitum est_--You know the canon--a traveller must eat what food
his hard fate sets before him. I grant you all a dispensation to eat
flesh this day, conditionally that you, brethren, say the Confiteor at
curfew time, that the knight give alms to his ability, and that all
and each of you fast from flesh on such day within the next month that
shall seem most convenient;--wherefore fall to and eat your food with
cheerful countenances, and you, Father Refectioner, _da mixtus_."

While the Abbot was thus stating the conditions on which his
indulgence was granted, he had already half finished a slice of the
noble haunch, and now washed it down with a flagon of Rhenish,
modestly tempered with water.

"Well is it said," he observed, as he required from the Refectioner
another slice, "that virtue is its own reward; for though this is but
humble fare, and hastily prepared, and eaten in a poor chamber, I do
not remember me of having had such an appetite since I was a simple
brother in the Abbey of Dundrennan, and was wont to labour in the
garden from morning until nones, when our Abbot struck the
_Cymbalum_. Then would I enter keen with hunger, parched with
thirst, (_da mihi vinum quaeso, et merum sit_,) and partake with
appetite of whatever was set before us, according to our rule; feast
or fast day, _caritas_ or _penitentia_, was the same to me.
I had no stomach complaints then, which now crave both the aid of wine
and choice cookery, to render my food acceptable to my palate, and
easy of digestion."

"It may be, holy father," said the Sub-Prior, "an occasional ride to
the extremity of Saint Mary's patrimony, may have the same happy
effect on your health as the air of the garden at Dundrennan."

"Perchance, with our patroness's blessing, such progresses may
advantage us," said the Abbot; "having an especial eye that our
venison is carefully killed by some woodsman that is master of his
craft."

"If the Lord Abbot will permit me," said the Kitchener, "I think the
best way to assure his lordship on that important point, would be to
retain as a yeoman-pricker, or deputy-ranger, the eldest son of this
good woman, Dame Glendinning, who is here to wait upon us. I should
know by mine office what belongs to killing of game, and I can safely
pronounce, that never saw I, or any other _coquinarius_, a bolt
so justly shot. It has cloven the very heart of the buck."

"What speak you to us of one good shot, father?" said Sir Piercie; "I
would advise you that such no more maketh a shooter, than doth one
swallow make a summer--I have seen this springald of whom you speak,
and if his hand can send forth his shafts as boldly as his tongue doth
utter presumptuous speeches, I will own him as good an archer as Robin
Hood."

"Marry," said the Abbot, "and it is fitting we know the truth of this
matter from the dame herself; for ill advised were we to give way to
any rashness in this matter, whereby the bounties which Heaven and our
patroness provide might be unskilfully mangled, and rendered unfit for
worthy men's use.--Stand forth, therefore, dame Glendinning, and tell
to us, as thy liege lord and spiritual Superior, using plainness and
truth, without either fear or favour, as being a matter wherein we are
deeply interested, Doth this son of thine use his bow as well as the
Father Kitchener avers to us?"

"So please your noble fatherhood," answered Dame Glendinning with a
deep curtsy, "I should know somewhat of archery to my cost, seeing my
husband--God assoilzie him!--was slain in the field of Pinkie with an
arrow-shot, while he was fighting under the Kirk's banner, as became a
liege vassal of the Halidome. He was a valiant man, please your
reverence, and an honest; and saving that he loved a bit of venison,
and shifted for his living at a time as Border-men will sometimes do,
I wot not of sin that he did. And yet, though I have paid for mass
after mass to the matter of a forty shilling, besides a quarter of
wheat and four firlocks of rye, I can have no assurance yet that he
has been delivered from purgatory."

"Dame," said the Lord Abbot, "this shall be looked into heedfully; and
since thy husband fell, as thou sayest, in the Kirk's quarrel, and
under her banner, rely upon it that we will have him out of purgatory
forthwith--that is, always provided he be there.--But it is not of
thy husband whom we now devise to speak, but of thy son; not of a shot
Scotsman, but of a shot deer--Wherefore, I say, answer me to the
point, is thy son a practised archer, ay or no?"

"Alack! my reverend lord," replied the widow, "and my croft would be
better tilled, if I could answer your reverence that he is
not.--Practised archer!--marry, holy sir, I would he would practise
something else--cross-bow and long-bow, hand-gun and hack-but,
falconet and saker, he can shoot with them all. And if it would please
this right honourable gentleman, our guest, to hold out his hat at the
distance of a hundred yards, our Halbert shall send shaft, bolt, or
bullet through it, (so that right honourable gentleman swerve not, but
hold out steady,) and I will forfeit a quarter of barley if he touch
but a knot of his ribands. I have seen our old Martin do as much, and
so has our right reverend the Sub-Prior, if he be pleased to remember
it."

"I am not like to forget it, dame," said Father Eustace; "for I knew
not which most to admire, the composure of the young marksman, or the
steadiness of the old mark. Yet I presume not to advise Sir Piercie
Shafton to subject his valuable beaver, and yet more valuable person,
to such a risk, unless it should be his own special pleasure."

"Be assured it is not," said Sir Piercie Shafton, something hastily;
"be well assured, holy father, that it is not. I dispute not the lad's
qualities, for which your reverence vouches. But bows are but wood,
strings are but flax, or the silk-worm excrement at best; archers are
but men, fingers may slip, eyes may dazzle, the blindest may hit the
butt, the best marker may shoot a bow's length beside. Therefore will
we try no perilous experiments."

"Be that as you will, Sir Piercie," said the Abbot; "meantime we will
name this youth bow-bearer in the forest granted to us by good King
David, that the chase might recreate our wearied spirits, the flesh of
the dear improve our poor commons, and the hides cover the books of
our library; thus tending at once to the sustenance of body and soul."

"Kneel down, woman, kneel down," said the Refectioner and the
Kitchener, with one voice, to Dame Glendinning, "and kiss his lordship's
hand, for the grace which he has granted to thy son."

They then, as if they had been chanting the service and the responses,
set off in a sort of duetto, enumerating the advantages of the
situation.

"A green gown and a pair of leathern galligaskins every Pentecost," said
the Kitchener.

"Four marks by the year at Candlemas," answered the Refectioner.

"A hogshead of ale at Martlemas, of the double strike, and single ale at
pleasure, as he shall agree with the Cellarer--"

"Who is a reasonable man," said the Abbot, "and will encourage an
active servant of the convent."

"A mess of broth and a dole of mutton or beef, at the Kitchener's, on
each high holiday," resumed the Kitchener.

"The gang of two cows and a palfrey on our Lady's meadow." answered
his brother officer.

"An ox-hide to make buskins of yearly, because of the brambles," echoed
the Kitchener.

"And various other perquisites, _quae nunc praescribere longum_,"
said the Abbot, summing, with his own lordly voice, the advantages
attached to the office of conventional bow-bearer.

Dame Glendinning was all this while on her knees, her head
mechanically turning from the one church officer to the other, which,
as they stood one on each side of her, had much the appearance of a
figure moved by clock-work, and so soon as they were silent, most
devotedly did she kiss the munificent hand of the Abbot. Conscious,
however, of Halbert's intractability in some points, she could not
help qualifying her grateful and reiterated thanks for the Abbot's
bountiful proffer, with a hope that Halbert would see his wisdom, and
accept of it.

"How," said the Abbot, bending his brows, "accept of it?--Woman, is
thy son in his right wits?"

Elspeth, stunned by the tone in which this question was asked, was
altogether unable to reply to it. Indeed, any answer she might have
made could hardly have been heard, as it pleased the two
office-bearers of the Abbot's table again to recommence their
alternate dialogue.

"Refuse!" said the Kitchener.

"Refuse!" answered the Refectioner, echoing the other's word in a tone
of still louder astonishment.

"Refuse four marks by the year!" said the one.

"Ale and beer--broth and mutton--cow's grass and palfrey's!" shouted
the Kitchener.

"Gown and galligaskins!" responded the Refectioner.

"A moment's patience, my brethren," answered the Sub-Prior, "and let
us not be thus astonished before cause is afforded of our amazement.
This good dame best knoweth the temper and spirit of her son--this
much I can say, that it lieth not towards letters or learning, of
which I have in vain endeavoured to instil into him some tincture.
Nevertheless, he is a youth of no common spirit, but much like those
(in my weak judgment) whom God raises up among a people when he
meaneth that their deliverance shall be wrought out with strength of
hand and valour of heart. Such men we have seen marked with a
waywardness, and even an obstinacy of character, which hath appeared
intractability and stupidity to those among whom they walked and were
conversant, until the very opportunity hath arrived in, which it was
the will of Providence that they should be the fitting instrument of
great things."

"Now, in good time hast thou spoken, Father Eustace," said the Abbot;
"and we will see this swankie before we decide upon the means of
employing him.--How say you, Sir Piercie Shafton, is it not the court
fashion to suit the man to the office, and not the office to the man?"

"So please your reverence and lordship," answered the Northumbrian
knight, "I do partly, that is, in some sort, subscribe to what your
wisdom hath delivered--Nevertheless, under reverence of the Sub-Prior,
we do not look for gallant leaders and national deliverers in the
hovels of the mean common people. Credit me, that if there be some
flashes of martial spirit about this young person, which I am not
called upon to dispute, (though I have seldom seen that presumption
and arrogance were made good upon the upshot by deed and action,) yet
still these will prove insufficient to distinguish him, save in his
own limited and lowly sphere--even as the glowworm, which makes a
goodly show among the grass of the field, would be of little avail if
deposited in a beacon-grate."

"Now, in good time," said the Sub-Prior, "and here comes the young
huntsman to speak for himself;" for, being placed opposite to the
window, he could observe Halbert as he ascended the little mound on
which the tower was situated.

"Summon him to our presence," said the Lord Abbot; and with an
obedient start the two attendant monks went off with emulous
alertness. Dame Glendinning sprung away at the same moment, partly to
gain an instant to recommend obedience to her son, partly to prevail
with him to change his apparel before coming in presence of the Abbot.
But the Kitchener and Refectioner, both speaking at once, had already
seized each an arm, and were leading Halbert in triumph into the
apartment, so that she could only ejaculate, "His will be done; but an
he had but had on him his Sunday's hose!"

Limited and humble as this desire was, the fates did not grant it, for
Halbert Glendinning was hurried into the presence of the Lord Abbot
and his party, without a word of explanation, and without a moment's
time being allowed to assume his holiday hose, which, in the language
of the time, implied both breeches and stockings.

Yet, though thus suddenly presented amid the centre of all eyes, there
was something in Halbert's appearance which commanded a certain degree
of respect from the company into which he was so unceremoniously
intruded, and the greater part of whom were disposed to consider him
with hauteur if not with absolute contempt. But his appearance and
reception we must devote to another chapter.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Nineteenth.


  Now choose thee, gallant, betwixt wealth and honour;
  There lies the pelf, in sum to bear thee through
  The dance of youth, and the turmoil of manhood,
  Yet leave enough for age's chimney-corner;
  But an thou grasp to it, farewell ambition,
  Farewell each hope of bettering thy condition,
  And raising thy low rank above the churls
  That till the earth for bread.
                                 OLD PLAY.

It is necessary to dwell for some brief space on the appearance and
demeanour of young Glendinning, ere we proceed to describe his interview
with the Abbot of St. Mary's, at this momentous crisis of his life.

Halbert was now about nineteen years old, tall and active rather than
strong, yet of that hardy conformation of limb and sinew, which
promises great strength when the growth shall be complete, and the
system confirmed.  He was perfectly well made, and, like most men who
have that advantage, possessed a grace and natural ease of manner and
carriage, which prevented his height from being the distinguished part
of his external appearance. It was not until you had compared his
stature with that of those amongst or near to whom he stood, that you
became sensible that the young Glendinning was upwards of six feet
high. In the combination of unusual height with perfect symmetry,
ease, and grace of carriage, the young heir of Glendearg,
notwithstanding his rustic birth and education, had greatly the
advantage even of Sir Piercie Shafton himself, whose stature was
lower, and his limbs, though there was no particular point to object
to, were on the whole less exactly proportioned. On the other hand,
Sir Piercie's very handsome countenance afforded him as decided an
advantage over the Scotsman, as regularity of features and brilliance
of complexion could give over traits which were rather strongly marked
than beautiful, and upon whose complexion the "skyey influences," to
which he was constantly exposed, had blended the red and white into
the purely nut-brown hue, which coloured alike cheeks, neck, and
forehead, and blushed only in a darker glow upon the former.--
Halbert's eyes supplied a marked and distinguished part of his
physiognomy. They were large and of a hazel colour, and sparkled in
moments of animation with such uncommon brilliancy, that it seemed as
if they actually emitted light. Nature had closely curled the locks of
dark-brown hair, which relieved and set off the features, such as we
have described them, displaying a bold and animated disposition, much
more than might have been expected from his situation, or from his
previous manners, which hitherto had seemed bashful, homely, and
awkward.

Halbert's dress was certainly not of that description which sets off
to the best advantage a presence of itself prepossessing. His jerkin
and hose were of coarse rustic cloth, and his cap of the same. A belt
round his waist served at once to sustain the broad-sword which we
have already mentioned, and to hold five or six arrows and bird-bolts,
which were stuck into it on the right side, along with a large knife
hilted with buck-horn, or, as it was then called, a dudgeon-dagger. To
complete his dress, we must notice his loose buskins of deer's hide,
formed so as to draw up on the leg as high as the knee, or at pleasure
to be thrust down lower than the calves. These were generally used at
the period by such as either had their principal occupation, or their
chief pleasure, in silvan sports, as they served to protect the legs
against the rough and tangled thickets into which the pursuit of game
frequently led them.--And these trifling particulars complete his
external appearance.

It is not easy to do justice to the manner in which young
Glendinning's soul spoke through his eyes when ushered so suddenly
into the company of those whom his earliest education had taught him
to treat with awe and reverence. The degree of embarrassment, which
his demeanor evinced, had nothing in it either meanly servile, or
utterly disconcerted. It was no more than became a generous and
ingenuous youth of a bold spirit, but totally inexperienced, who
should for the first time be called upon to think and act for himself
in such society and under such disadvantageous circumstances.  There
was not in his carriage a grain either of forwardness or of timidity,
which a friend could have wished away.

He kneeled and kissed the Abbot's hand, then rose, and retiring two
paces, bowed respectfully to the circle around, smiling gently as he
received an encouraging nod from the Sub-Prior, to whom alone he was
personally known, and blushing as he encountered the anxious look of
Mary Avenel, who beheld with painful interest the sort of ordeal to
which her foster-brother was about to be subjected. Recovering from
the transient flurry of spirits into which the encounter of her glance
had thrown him, he stood composedly awaiting till the Abbot should
express his pleasure.

The ingenuous expression of countenance, noble form, and graceful
attitude of the young man, failed not to prepossess in his favor the
churchmen in whose presence he stood. The Abbot looked round, and
exchanged a gracious and approving glance with his counsellor Father
Eustace, although probably the appointment of a ranger, or bow-bearer,
was one in which he might have been disposed to proceed without the
Sub-Prior's advice, were it but to show his own free agency. But the
good mien of the young man now in nomination was such, that he rather
hastened to exchange congratulation on meeting with so proper a
subject of promotion, than to indulge any other feeling. Father
Eustace enjoyed the pleasure which a well-constituted mind derives
from seeing a benefit light on a deserving object; for as he had not
seen Halbert since circumstances had made so material a change in his
manner and feelings, he scarce doubted that the proffered
appointment would, notwithstanding his mother's uncertainty, suit the
disposition of a youth who had appeared devoted to woodland sports,
and a foe alike to sedentary or settled occupation of any kind. The
Refectioner and Kitchener were so well pleased with Halbert's
prepossessing appearance, that they seemed to think that the salary,
emoluments, and perquisites, the dole, the grazing, the gown, and the
galligaskins, could scarce be better bestowed than on the active and
graceful figure before them.

Sir Piercie Shafton, whether from being more deeply engaged in his own
cogitations, or that the subject was unworthy of his notice, did not
seem to partake of the general feeling of approbation excited by the
young man's presence. He sate with his eyes half shut, and his arms
folded, appearing to be wrapped in contemplations of a nature deeper
than those arising out of the scene before him. But, notwithstanding
his seeming abstraction and absence of mind, there was a flutter of
vanity in Sir Piercie's very handsome countenance, an occasional
change of posture from one striking attitude (or what he conceived to
be such) to another, and an occasional stolen glance at the female
part of the company, to spy how far he succeeded in riveting their
attention, which gave a marked advantage, in comparison, to the less
regular and more harsh features of Halbert Glendinning, with their
composed, manly, and deliberate expression of mental fortitude.

Of the females belonging to the family of Glendearg, the Miller's
daughter alone had her mind sufficiently at leisure to admire, from
time to time, the graceful attitudes of Sir Piercie Shafton; for both
Mary Avenel and Dame Glendinning were waiting in anxiety and
apprehension the answer which Halbert was to return to the Abbot's
proposal, and fearfully anticipating the consequences of his probable
refusal. The conduct of his brother Edward, for a lad constitutionally
shy, respectful, and even timid, was at once affectionate and noble.
This younger son of Dame Elspeth had stood unnoticed in a corner,
after the Abbot, at the request of the Sub-Prior, had honoured him
with some passing notice, and asked him a few common-place questions
about his progress in Donatus, and in the _Promptuarium
Parvulorum_, without waiting for the answers. From his corner he
now glided round to his brother's side, and keeping a little behind
him, slid his right hand into the huntsman's left, and by a gentle
pressure, which Halbert instantly and ardently returned, expressed at
once his interest in his situation, and his resolution to share his
fate.

The group was thus arranged, when, after the pause of two or three
minutes, which he employed in slowly sipping his cup of wine, in order
that he might enter on his proposal with due and deliberate dignity,
the Abbot at length expressed himself thus:--

"My son--we your lawful Superior, and the Abbot, under God's favour,
of the community of Saint Mary's, have heard of your manifold good
gifts--a-hem--especially touching wood-craft--and the huntsman-like
fashion in which you strike your game, truly and as a yeoman should,
not abusing Heaven's good benefits by spoiling the flesh, as is too
often seen in careless rangers--a-hem." He made here a pause, but
observing that Glendinning only replied to his compliment by a bow, he
proceeded,--"My son, we commend your modesty; nevertheless, we will
that thou shouldst speak freely to us touching that which we have
premeditated for thine advancement, meaning to confer on thee the
office of bow-bearer and ranger, as well over the chases and forests
wherein our house hath privilege by the gifts of pious kings and
nobles, whose souls now enjoy the fruits of their bounties to the
Church as to those which belong to us in exclusive right of property
and perpetuity. Thy knee, my son--that we may, with our own hand, and
without loss of time, induct thee into office."

"Kneel down," said the Kitchener on the one side; and "Kneel down,"
said the Refectioner on the other.

But Halbert Glendinning remained standing.

"Were it to show gratitude and good-will for your reverend lordship's
noble offer, I could not," he said, "kneel low enough, or remain long
enough kneeling. But I may not kneel to take investure of your noble
gift, my Lord Abbot, being a man determined to seek my fortune
otherwise."

"How is that, sir?" said the Abbot, knitting his brows; "do I hear you
speak aright? and do you, a born vassal of the Halidome, at the moment
when I am destining to you such a noble expression of my good-will,
propose exchanging my service for that of any other?"

"My lord," said Halbert Glendinning, "it grieves me to think you hold
me capable of undervaluing your gracious offer, or of exchanging your
service for another. But your noble proffer doth but hasten the
execution of a determination which I have long since formed."

"Ay, my son," said the Abbot, "is it indeed so?--right early have you
learned to form resolutions without consulting those on whom you
naturally depend. But what may it be, this sagacious resolution, if I
may so far pray you?"

"To yield up to my brother and mother," answered Halbert, "mine
interest in the fief of Glendearg, lately possessed by my father,
Simon Glendinning: and having prayed your lordship to be the same kind
and generous master to them, that your predecessors, the venerable
Abbots of Saint Mary's, have been to my fathers in times past; for
myself, I am determined to seek my fortune where I may best find it."

Dame Glendinning here ventured, emboldened by maternal anxiety, to
break silence with an exclamation of "O my son!" Edward clinging to
his brother's side, half spoke, half whispered, a similar ejaculation,
of "Brother! brother!"

The Sub-Prior took up the matter in a tone of grave reprehension,
which, as he conceived, the interest he had always taken in the family
at Glendearg required at his hand.

"Wilful young man," he said, "what folly can urge thee to push back
the hand that is stretched out to aid thee? What visionary aim hast
thou before thee, that can compensate for the decent and sufficient
independence which thou art now rejecting with scorn?"

"Four marks by the year, duly and truly," said the Kitchener.

"Cow's-grass, doublet, and galligaskins," responded the Refectioner.

"Peace, my brethren," said the Sub-Prior; "and may it please your
lordship, venerable father, upon my petition, to allow this headstrong
youth a day for consideration, and it shall be my part so to
indoctrinate him, as to convince him what is due on this occasion to
your lordship, and to his family, and to himself."

"Your kindness, reverend father," said the youth, "craves my dearest
thanks--it is the continuance of a long train of benevolence towards
me, for which I give you my gratitude, for I have nothing else to
offer. It is my mishap, not your fault, that your intentions have been
frustrated. But my present resolution is fixed and unalterable. I
cannot accept the generous offer of the Lord Abbot; my fate calls me
elsewhere, to scenes where I shall end it or mend it."

"By our Lady," said the Abbot, "I think the youth be mad indeed--or
that you, Sir Piercie, judged of him most truly, when you prophesied
that he would prove unfit for the promotion we designed him--it may be
you knew something of this wayward humour before?"

"By the mass, not I," answered Sir Piercie Shafton, with his usual
indifference. "I but judged of him by his birth and breeding; for seldom
doth a good hawk come out of a kite's egg."

"Thou art thyself a kite, and kestrel to boot," replied Halbert
Glendinning, without a moment's hesitation.

"This in our presence, and to a man of worship?" said the Abbot, the
blood rushing to his face.

"Yes, my lord," answered the youth; "even in your presence I return to
this gay man's face, the causeless dishonour--which he has flung on my
name. My brave father, who fell in the cause of his country, demands
that justice at the hands of his son!"

"Unmannered boy!" said the Abbot.

"Nay, my good lord," said the knight, "praying pardon for the coarse
interruption, let me entreat you not to be wroth with this
rustical--Credit me, the north wind shall as soon puff one of your
rocks from its basis, as aught which I hold so slight and
inconsiderate as the churlish speech of an untaught churl, shall move
the spleen of Piercie Shafton."

"Proud as you are, Sir Knight," said Halbert, "in your imagined
superiority, be not too confident that you cannot be moved."

"Faith, by nothing that thou canst urge," said Sir Piercie.

"Knowest thou, then, this token?" said young Glendinning, offering to
him the silver bodkin he had received from the White Lady.

Never was such an instant change, from the most contemptuous serenity,
to the most furious state of passion, as that which Sir Piercie
Shafton exhibited. It was the difference between a cannon lying quiet
in its embrasure, and the same gun when touched by the linstock. He
started up, every limb quivering with rage, and his features so
inflamed and agitated by passion, that he more resembled a demoniac,
than a man under the regulation of reason. He clenched both his fists,
and thrusting them forward, offered them furiously at the face of
Glendinning, who was even himself startled at the frantic state of
excitation which his action had occasioned.  The next moment he
withdrew them, struck his open palm against his own forehead, and
rushed out of the room in a state of indescribable agitation.  The
whole matter had been so sudden, that no person present had time to
interfere.

When Sir Piercie Shafton had left the apartment, there was a moment's
pause of astonishment; and then a general demand that Halbert
Glendinning should instantly explain by what means he had produced
such a violent change in the deportment of the English cavalier.

"I did nought to him," answered Halbert Glendinning, "but what you
all saw--am I to answer for his fantastic freaks of humour?"

"Boy," said the Abbot, in his most authoritative manner, "these
subterfuges shall not avail thee. This is not a man to be driven from
his temperament without some sufficient cause. That cause was given by
thee, and must have been known to thee. I command thee, as thou wilt
save thyself from worse measure, to explain to me by what means thou
hast moved our friend thus--We choose not that our vassals shall drive
our guests mad in our very presence, and we remain ignorant of the
means whereby that purpose is effected."

"So may it please your reverence, I did but show him this token," said
Halbert Glendinning, delivering it at the same time to the Abbot, who
looked at it with much attention, and then, shaking his head, gravely
delivered it to the Sub-Prior, without speaking a word.

Father Eustace looked at the mysterious token with some attention; and
then addressing Halbert in a stern and severe voice, said, "Young man,
if thou wouldst not have us suspect thee of some strange
double-dealing in this matter, let us instantly know whence thou hadst
this token, and how it possesses an influence on Sir Piercie
Shafton?"--It would have been extremely difficult for Halbert, thus
hard pressed, to have either evaded or answered so puzzling a
question. To have avowed the truth might, in those times, have
occasioned his being burnt at a stake, although, in ours, his
confession would have only gained for him the credit of a liar beyond
all rational credibility. He was fortunately relieved by the return of
Sir Piercie Shafton himself, whose ear caught, as he entered, the
sound of the Sub-Prior's question.

Without waiting until Halbert Glendinning replied, he came forward,
whispering to him as he passed, "Be secret--thou shalt have the
satisfaction thou hast dared to seek for."

When he returned to his place, there were still marks of discomposure
on his brow; but, becoming apparently collected and calm, he looked
around him, and apologized for the indecorum of which he had been
guilty, which he ascribed to sudden and severe indisposition. All were
silent, and looked on each other with some surprise.

The Lord Abbot gave orders for all to retire from the apartment, save
himself, Sir Piercie Shafton, and the Sub-Prior. "And have an eye," he
added, "on that bold youth, that he escape not; for if he hath
practised by charm, or otherwise, on the health of our worshipful
guest, I swear by the alb and mitre which I wear, that his punishment
shall be most exemplary."

"My lord and venerable father," said Halbert, bowing respectfully,
"fear not but that I will abide my doom. I think you will best learn
from the worshipful knight himself, what is the cause of his
distemperature, and how slight my share in it has been."

"Be assured," said the knight, without looking up, however, while he
spoke, "I will satisfy the Lord Abbot."

With these words the company retired, and with them young Glendinning.
When the Abbot, the Sub-Prior, and the English knight were left alone,
Father Eustace, contrary to his custom, could not help speaking the
first. "Expound unto us, noble sir," he said, "by what mysterious
means the production of this simple toy could so far move your spirit,
and overcome your patience, after you had shown yourself proof to all
the provocation offered by this self-sufficient and singular youth?"

The knight took the silver bodkin from the good father's hand, looked
at it with great composure, and, having examined it all over, returned
it to the Sub-Prior, saying at the same time, "In truth, venerable
father, I cannot but marvel, that the wisdom implied alike in your
silver hairs, and in your eminent rank, should, like a babbling hound,
(excuse the similitude,) open thus loudly on a false scent. I were,
indeed, more slight to be moved than the leaves of the aspen-tree,
which wag at the least breath of heaven, could I be touched by such a
trifle as this, which in no way concerns me more than if the same
quantity of silver were stricken into so many groats. Truth is, that
from my youth upward, I have been subjected to such a malady as you
saw me visited with even now--a cruel and searching pain, which goeth
through nerve and bone, even as a good brand in the hands of a brave
soldier sheers through limb and sinew--but it passes away speedily, as
you yourselves may judge."

"Still," said the Sub-Prior, "this will not account for the youth
offering to you this piece of silver, as a token by which you were to
understand something, and, as we must needs conjecture, something
disagreeable."

"Your reverence is to conjecture what you will," said Sir Piercie;
"but I cannot pretend to lay your judgment on the right scent when I
see it at fault. I hope I am not liable to be called upon to account
for the foolish actions of a malapert boy?"

"Assuredly," said the Sub-Prior, "we shall prosecute no inquiry which
is disagreeable to our guest. Nevertheless," said he, looking to his
Superior, "this chance may, in some sort, alter the plan your lordship
had formed for your worshipful guest's residence for a brief term in
this tower, as a place alike of secrecy and of security; both of
which, in the terms which we now stand on with England, are
circumstances to be desired."

"In truth," said the Abbot, "and the doubt is well thought on, were it
as well removed; for I scarce know in the Halidome so fitting a place
of refuge, yet see I not how to recommend it to our worshipful guest,
considering the unrestrained petulance of this headstrong youth."

"Tush! reverend sirs--what would you make of me?" said Sir Piercie
Shafton. "I protest, by mine honour, I would abide in this house were
I to choose. What! I take no exceptions at the youth for showing a
flash of spirit, though the spark may light on mine own head. I honour
the lad for it. I protest I will abide here, and he shall aid me in
striking down a deer. I must needs be friends with him, and he be such
a shot: and we will speedily send down to my lord Abbot a buck of the
first head, killed so artificially as shall satisfy even the reverend
Kitchener."

This was said with such apparent ease and good-humour, that the Abbot
made no farther observation on what had passed, but proceeded to
acquaint his guest with the details of furniture, hangings,
provisions, and so forth, which he proposed to send up to the Tower of
Glendearg for his accommodation. This discourse, seasoned with a cup
or two of wine, served to prolong the time until the reverend Abbot
ordered his cavalcade to prepare for their return to the Monastery.

"As we have," he said, "in the course of this our toilsome journey,
lost our meridian, [Footnote: The hour of repose at noon, which, in
the middle ages, was employed in slumber, and which the monastic rules
of nocturnal vigils rendered necessary.] indulgence shall be given to
those of our attendants who shall, from very weariness, be unable to
attend the duty at prime, [Footnote: _Prime_ was the midnight
service of the monks.] and this by way of misericord or
_indulgentia._" [Footnote: _Misericord,_ according to the
learned work of Fosbrooke on British Monachism, meant not only an
indulgence, or exoneration from particular duties, but also a
particular apartment in a convent, where the monks assembled to enjoy
such indulgences or allowances as were granted beyond the rule.]

Having benevolently intimated a boon to his faithful followers, which
he probably judged would be far from unacceptable, the good Abbot,
seeing all ready for his journey, bestowed his blessing on the
assembled household--gave his hand to be kissed by Dame
Glendinning--himself kissed the cheek of Mary Avenel, and even of the
Miller's maiden, when they approached to render him the same
homage--commanded Halbert to rule his temper, and to be aiding and
obedient in all things to the English Knight--admonished Edward to be
_discipulus impiger atque strenuus_--then took a courteous
farewell of Sir Piercie Shafton, advising him to lie close, for fear
of the English borderers, who might be employed to kidnap him; and
having discharged these various offices of courtesy, moved forth to
the courtyard, followed by the whole establishment. Here, with a heavy
sigh, approaching to a groan, the venerable father heaved himself upon
his palfrey, whose dark purple housings swept the ground; and, greatly
comforted that the discretion of the animal's pace would be no longer
disturbed by the gambadoes of Sir Piercie and his prancing war-horse,
he set forth at a sober and steady trot upon his return to the
Monastery.

When the Sub-Prior had mounted to accompany his principal, his eye
sought out Halbert, who, partly hidden by a projection of the outward
wall of the court, stood apart from, and gazing upon the departing
cavalcade, and the group which assembled around them. Unsatisfied with
the explanation he had received concerning the mysterious transaction
of the silver bodkin, yet interesting himself in the youth, of whose
character he had formed a favourable idea, the worthy monk resolved to
take an early opportunity of investigating that matter. In the
meanwhile, he looked upon Halbert with a serious and warning aspect,
and held up his finger to him as he signed farewell. He then joined
the rest of the churchmen, and followed his Superior down the valley.




Chapter the Twentieth.


  I hope you'll give me cause to think you noble.
  And do me right with your sword, sir, as becomes
  One gentleman of honour to another;

  All this is fair, sir--let us make no days on't,
  I'll lead your way.

LOVE'S PILGRIMAGE.

The look and sign of warning which the Sub-Prior gave to Halbert
Glendinning as they parted, went to his heart; for although he had
profited much less than Edward by the good man's instructions, he had
a sincere reverence for his person; and even the short time he had for
deliberation tended to show him he was embarked in a perilous
adventure. The nature of the provocation which he had given to Sir
Piercie Shafton he could not even conjecture; but he saw that it was
of a mortal quality, and he was now to abide the consequences.

That he might not force these consequences forward by any premature
renewal of their quarrel, he resolved to walk apart for an hour, and
consider on what terms he was to meet this haughty foreigner. The time
seemed propitious for his doing so without having the appearance of
wilfully shunning the stranger, as all the members of the little
household were dispersing either to perform such tasks as had been
interrupted by the arrival of the dignitaries, or to put in order what
had been deranged by their visit.

Leaving the tower, therefore, and descending, unobserved as he
thought, the knoll on which it stood, Halbert gained the little piece
of level ground which extended betwixt the descent of the hill, and
the first sweep made by the brook after washing the foot of the
eminence on which the tower was situated, where a few straggling birch
and oak-trees served to secure him from observation. But scarcely had
he reached the spot, when he was surprised to feel a smart tap upon
the shoulder, and, turning around, he perceived he had been closely
followed by Sir Piercie Shafton.  When, whether from our state of
animal spirits, want of confidence in the justice of our cause, or any
other motive, our own courage happens to be in a wavering condition,
nothing tends so much altogether to disconcert us, as a great
appearance of promptitude on the part of our antagonist.  Halbert
Glendinning, both morally and constitutionally intrepid, was
nevertheless somewhat troubled at seeing the stranger, whose
resentment he had provoked, appear at once before him, and with an
aspect which boded hostility. But though his heart might beat somewhat
thicker, he was too high-spirited to exhibit any external signs of
emotion.--"What is your pleasure, Sir Piercie?" he said to the English
knight, enduring without apparent discomposure all the terrors which
his antagonist had summoned into his aspect.

"What is my pleasure!" answered Sir Piercie; "a goodly question after
the part you have acted towards me!--Young man, I know not what
infatuation has led thee to place thyself in direct and insolent
opposition to one who is a guest of thy liege-lord the Abbot, and who,
even from the courtesy due to thy mother's roof, had a right to remain
there without meeting insult. Neither do I ask, or care, by what means
thou hast become possessed of the fatal secret by which thou hast
dared to offer me open shame. But I must now tell thee, that the
possession of it has cost thee thy life."

"Not, I trust, if my hand and sword can defend it," replied Halbert,
boldly.

"True," said the Englishman, "I mean not to deprive thee of thy fair
chance of self-defence. I am only sorry to think, that, young and
country-bred as thou art, it can but little avail thee. But thou must
be well aware, that in this quarrel I shall use no terms of quarter."

"Rely on it, proud man," answered the youth, "that I shall ask none;
and although thou speakest as if I lay already at thy feet, trust me,
that as I am determined never to ask thy mercy, so I am not fearful of
needing it."

"Thou wilt, then," said the knight, "do nothing to avert the certain
fate which thou hast provoked with such wantonness?"

"And how were that to be purchased?" replied Halbert Glendinning, more
with the wish of obtaining some farther insight into the terms on
which he stood with this stranger, than to make him the submission
which he might require.

"Explain to me instantly," said Sir Piercie, "without equivocation or
delay, by what means thou wert enabled to wound my honour so
deeply--and shouldst thou point out to me by so doing an enemy more
worthy of my resentment, I will permit thine own obscure
insignificance to draw a veil over thine insolence."

"This is too high a flight," said Glendinning, fiercely, "for thine
own presumption to soar without being checked. Thou hast come to my
father's house, as well as I can guess, a fugitive and an exile, and
thy first greeting to its inhabitants has been that of contempt and
injury. By what means I have been able to retort that contempt, let
thine own conscience tell thee. Enough for me that I stand on the
privilege of a free Scotchman, and will brook no insult unreturned,
and no injury unrequited."

"It is well, then," said Sir Piercie Shafton; "we will dispute this
matter to-morrow morning with our swords. Let the time be daybreak,
and do thou assign the place. We will go forth as if to strike a
deer."

"Content," replied Halbert Glendinning: "I will guide thee to a spot
where an hundred men might fight and fall without any chance of
interruption."

"It is well," answered Sir Piercie Shafton. "Here then we part.--Many
will say, that in thus indulging the right of a gentleman to the son
of a clod-breaking peasant, I derogate from my sphere, even as the
blessed sun would derogate should he condescend to compare and match
his golden beams with the twinkle of a pale, blinking, expiring,
gross-fed taper. But no consideration of rank shall prevent my
avenging the insult thou hast offered me. We bear a smooth face,
observe me, Sir Villagio, before the worshipful inmates of yonder
cabin, and to-morrow we try conclusions with our swords." So saying,
he turned away towards the tower.

It may not be unworthy of notice, that in the last speech only, had
Sir Piercie used some of those flowers of rhetoric which characterized
the usual style of his conversation. Apparently, a sense of wounded
honour, and the deep desire of vindicating his injured feelings, had
proved too strong for the fantastic affectation of his acquired
habits. Indeed, such is usually the influence of energy of mind, when
called forth and exerted, that Sir Piercie Shafton had never appeared
in the eyes of his youthful antagonist half so much deserving of
esteem and respect as in this brief dialogue, by which they exchanged
mutual defiance. As he followed him slowly to the tower, he could not
help thinking to himself, that, had the English knight always
displayed this superior tone of bearing and feeling, he would not
probably have felt so earnestly disposed to take offence at his hand.
Mortal offence, however, had been exchanged, and the matter was to be
put to mortal arbitrement.

The family met at the evening meal, when Sir Piercie Shafton extended
the benignity of his countenance and the graces of his conversation
far more generally over the party than he had hitherto condescended to
do. The greater part of his attention was, of course, still engrossed
by his divine inimitable Discretion, as he chose to term Mary Avenel;
but, nevertheless there were interjectional flourishes to the Maid of
the Mill, under the title of Comely Damsel, and to the Dame, under
that of Worthy Matron.  Nay, lest he should fail to excite their
admiration by the graces of his rhetoric, he generously, and without
solicitation, added those of his voice; and after regretting bitterly
the absence of his viol-de-gamba, he regaled them with a song,
"which," said he, "the inimitable Astrophel, whom mortals call Philip
Sidney, composed in the nonage of his muse, to show the world what
they are to expect from his riper years, and which will one day see
the light in that not-to-be-paralleled perfection of human wit, which
he has addressed to his sister, the matchless Parthenope, whom men
call Countess of Pembroke; a work," he continued, "whereof his
friendship hath permitted me, though unworthy, to be an occasional
partaker, and whereof I may well say, that the deep afflictive tale
which awakeneth our sorrows, is so relieved with brilliant
similitudes, dulcet descriptions, pleasant poems, and engaging
interludes, that they seem as the stars of the firmament, beautifying
the dusky robe of night.  And though I wot well how much the lovely
and quaint language will suffer by my widowed voice, widowed in that
it is no longer matched by my beloved viol-de-gamba, I will essay to
give you a taste of the ravishing sweetness of the poesy of the
un-to-be-imitated Astrophel."

So saying, he sung without mercy or remorse about five hundred verses,
of which the two first and the four last may suffice for a specimen--

  "What tongue can her perfections tell,
  On whose each part all pens may dwell.

  Of whose high praise arid praiseful bliss,
  Goodness the pen. Heaven paper is;
  The ink immortal fame doth send,
  As I began so I must end."

As Sir Piercie Shafton always sung with his eyes half shut, it was not
until, agreeably to the promise of poetry, he had fairly made an end,
that looking round, he discovered that the greater part of his
audience had, in the meanwhile, yielded to the charms of repose. Mary
Avenel, indeed, from a natural sense of politeness, had contrived to
keep awake through all the perplexities of the divine Astrophel; but
Mysie was transported in dreams back to the dusty atmosphere of her
father's mill. Edward himself, who had given his attention for some
time, had at length fallen fast asleep; and the good dame's nose,
could its tones have been put in regulation, might have supplied the
bass of the lamented viol-de-gamba. Halbert, however, who had no
temptation to give way to the charms of slumber, remained awake with
his eyes fixed on the songster; not that he was better entertained
with the words, or more ravished with the execution, than the rest of
the company, but rather because he admired, or perhaps envied, the
composure, which could thus spend the evening in interminable
madrigals, when the next morning was to be devoted to deadly combat.
Yet it struck his natural acuteness of observation, that the eye of
the gallant cavalier did now and then, furtively as it were, seek a
glance of his countenance, as if to discover how he was taking the
exhibition of his antagonist's composure and serenity of mind.

He shall read nothing in my countenance, thought Halbert, proudly, that
can make him think my indifference less than his own.

And taking from the shelf a bag full of miscellaneous matters
collected for the purpose, he began with great industry to dress
hooks, and had finished half-a-dozen of flies (we are enabled, for the
benefit of those who admire the antiquities of the gentle art of
angling, to state that they were brown hackles) by the time that Sir
Piercie had arrived at the conclusion of his long-winded strophes of
the divine Astrophel. So that he also testified a magnanimous contempt
of that which to-morrow should bring forth.

As it now waxed late, the family of Glendearg separated for the evening;
Sir Piercie first saying to the dame, that "her son Albert--"

"Halbert," said Elspeth, with emphasis, "Halbert, after his goodsire,
Halbert Brydone."

"Well, then, I have prayed your son, Halbert, that we may strive
tomorrow, with the sun's earliness, to wake a stag from his lair, that
I may see whether he be as prompt at that sport as fame bespeaks him."

"Alas! sir," answered Dame Elspeth, "he is but too prompt, an you talk
of promptitude, at any thing that has steel at one end of it, and
mischief at the other. But he is at your honourable disposal, and I
trust you will teach him how obedience is due to our venerable father
and lord, the Abbot, and prevail with him to take the bow-bearer's
place in fee; for, as the two worthy monks said, it will be a great
help to a widow-woman."

"Trust me, good dame," replied Sir Piercie, "it is my purpose so to
indoctrinate him. touching his conduct and bearing towards his
betters, that he shall not lightly depart from the reverence due to
them.--We meet, then, beneath the birch-trees in the plain," he said,
looking to Halbert, "so soon as the eye of day hath opened its
lids."--Halbert answered with a sign of acquiescence, and the knight
proceeded, "And now, having wished to my fairest Discretion those
pleasant dreams which wave their pinions around the couch of sleeping
beauty, and to this comely damsel the bounties of Morpheus, and to all
others the common good-night, I will crave you leave to depart to my
place of rest, though I may say with the poet,

  'Ah rest!--no rest but change of place and posture:
  Ah sleep!--no sleep but worn-out Nature's swooning;
  Ah bed!--no bed but cushion fill'd with stones:
  Rest, sleep, nor bed, await not on an exile.'"

With a delicate obeisance he left the room, evading Dame Glendinning,
who hastened to assure him he would find his accommodations for repose
much more agreeable than they had been the night before, there having
been store of warm coverlets, and a soft feather-bed, sent up from the
Abbey.  But the good knight probably thought that the grace and effect
of his exit would be diminished, if he were recalled from his heroics
to discuss such sublunary and domestic topics, and therefore hastened
away without waiting to hear her out.

"A pleasant gentleman," said Dame Glendinning; "but I will warrant him
an humorous [Footnote: _Humorous_--full of whims--thus
Shakspeare, "Humorous as winter."--The vulgar word humorsome comes
nearest to the meaning.]--And sings a sweet song, though it is
somewhat of the longest.--Well, I make mine avow he is goodly
company--I wonder when he will go away."

Having thus expressed her respect for her guest, not without
intimation that she was heartily tired of his company, the good dame
gave the signal for the family to disperse, and laid her injunctions
on Halbert to attend Sir Piercie Shafton at daybreak, as he required.

When stretched on his pallet by his brother's side, Halbert had no
small cause to envy the sound sleep which instantly settled on the
eyes of Edward, but refused him any share of its influence. He saw now
too well what the spirit had darkly indicated, that, in granting the
boon which he had asked so unadvisedly, she had contributed more to
his harm than his good. He was now sensible, too late, of the various
dangers and inconveniences with which his dearest friends were
threatened, alike by his discomfiture or his success in the
approaching duel. If he fell, he might say personally, "good-night
all." But it was not the less certain that he should leave a dreadful
legacy of distress and embarrassment to his mother and family,--an
anticipation which by no means tended to render the front of death, in
itself a grisly object, more agreeable to his imagination. The
vengeance of the Abbot, his conscience told him, was sure to descend
on his mother and brother, or could only be averted by the generosity
of the victor--And Mary Avenel--he should have shown himself, if he
succumbed in the present combat, as inefficient in protecting her, as
he had been unnecessarily active in bringing disaster on her, and on
the house in which she had been protected from infancy. And to this
view of the case were to be added all those imbittered and anxious
feelings with which the bravest men, even in a better or less doubtful
quarrel, regard the issue of a dubious conflict, the first time when
it has been their fate to engage in an affair of that nature.

But however disconsolate the prospect seemed in the event of his being
conquered, Halbert could expect from victory little more than the
safety of his own life, and the gratification of his wounded pride. To
his friends--to his mother and brother--especially to Mary Avenel--the
consequences of his triumph would be more certain destruction than the
contingency of his defeat and death. If the English knight survived,
he might in courtesy extend his protection to them; but if he fell,
nothing was likely to screen them from the vindictive measures which
the Abbot and convent would surely adopt against the violation of the
peace of the Halidome, and the slaughter of a protected guest by one
of their own vassals, within whose house they had lodged him for
shelter. These thoughts, in which neither view of the case augured
aught short of ruin to his family, and that ruin entirely brought on
by his own rashness, were thorns in Halbert Glendinning's pillow, and
deprived his soul of peace and his eyes of slumber.

There appeared no middle course, saving one which was marked by
degradation, and which, even if he stooped to it, was by no means free
of danger.  He might indeed confess to the English knight the strange
circumstances which led to his presenting him with that token which
the White Lady (in her displeasure as it now seemed) had given him,
that he might offer it to Sir Piercie Shafton. But to this avowal his
pride could not stoop, and reason, who is wonderfully ready to be of
counsel with pride on such occasions, offered many arguments to show
it would be useless as well as mean so far to degrade himself. "If I
tell a tale so wonderful," thought he, "shall I not either be
stigmatized as a liar, or punished as a wizard?--Were Sir Piercie
Shafton generous, noble, and benevolent, as the champions of whom we
hear in romance, I might indeed gain his ear, and, without demeaning
myself, escape from the situation in which I am placed. But as he is,
or at least seems to be, self-conceited, arrogant, vain, and
presumptuous--I should but humble myself in vain--and I will not
humble myself!" he said, starting out of bed, grasping his broadsword,
and brandishing it in the light of the moon, which streamed through
the deep niche that served them as a window; when, to his extreme
surprise and terror, an airy form stood in the moonlight, but
intercepted not the reflection on the floor. Dimly as it was
expressed, the sound of the voice soon made him sensible he saw the
White Lady.

At no time had her presence seemed so terrific to him; for when he had
invoked her, it was with the expectation of the apparition, and the
determination to abide the issue. But now she had come uncalled, and
her presence impressed him with a sense of approaching misfortune, and
with the hideous apprehension that he had associated himself with a
demon, over whose motions he had no control, and of whose powers and
quality he had no certain knowledge. He remained, therefore, in mere
terror, gazing on the apparition, which chanted or recited in cadence
the following lines--

  "He whose heart for vengeance sued,
  Must not shrink from shedding blood
  The knot that thou hast tied with word,
  Thou must loose by edge of sword."

"Avaunt thee, false Spirit!" said Halbert Glendinning; "I have bought
thy advice too dearly already--Begone in the name of God!"

The Spirit laughed; and the cold unnatural sound of her laughter had
something in it more fearful than the usually melancholy tones of her
voice. She then replied,--

  "You have summon'd me once--you have summoned me twice,
  And without e'er a summons I come to you thrice;
  Unask'd for, unsued for, you came to my glen;
  Unsued and unask'd I am with you again."

Halbert Glendinning gave way for a moment to terror, and called on his
brother, "Edward! waken, waken, for Our Lady's sake!"

Edward awaked accordingly, and asked what he wanted.

"Look out," said Halbert, "look up! seest thou no one in the room?"

"No, upon my good word," said Edward, looking out.

"What! seest thou nothing in the moonshine upon the floor there?"

"No, nothing," answered Edward, "save thyself resting on thy naked
sword. I tell thee, Halbert, thou shouldst trust more to thy spiritual
arms, and less to those of steel and iron. For this many a night hast
thou started and moaned, and cried out of fighting, and of spectres,
and of goblins--thy sleep hath not refreshed thee--thy waking hath
been a dream.--Credit me, dear Halbert, say the _Pater_ and
_Credo_, resign thyself to the protection of God, and thou wilt
sleep sound and wake in comfort."

"It may be," said Halbert slowly, and having his eye still bent on the
female form which to him seemed distinctly visible,--"it may be. But
tell me, dear Edward, seest thou no one on the chamber floor but me?"

"No one," answered Edward, raising himself on his elbow; "dear
brother, lay aside thy weapon, say thy prayers, and lay thee down to
rest."

While he thus spoke, the Spirit smiled at Halbert as if in scorn; her
wan cheek faded in the wan moonlight even before the smile had passed
away, and Halbert himself no longer beheld the vision to which he had
so anxiously solicited his brother's attention. "May God preserve my
wits!" he said, as, laying aside his weapon, he again threw himself on
his bed.

"Amen! my dearest brother," answered Edward; "but we must not provoke
that Heaven in our wantonness which we invoke in our misery.--Be not
angry with me, my dear brother--I know not why you have totally of
late estranged yourself from me--It is true, I am neither so athletic
in body, nor so alert in courage, as you have been from your infancy;
yet, till lately, you have not absolutely cast off my society--Believe
me, I have wept in secret, though I forbore to intrude myself on your
privacy. The time has been--when you held me not so cheap; and--when,
if I could not follow the game so closely, or mark it so truly as you,
I could fill up our intervals of pastime with pleasant tales of the
olden times, which I had read or heard, and which excited even your
attention as we sate and ate our provision by some pleasant
spring--but now I have, though I know not why, lost thy regard and
affection.--Nay, toss not thy arms about thee thus wildly," said the
younger brother; "from thy strange dreams, I fear some touch of fever
hath affected thy blood--let me draw closer around thee thy mantle."

"Forbear," said Halbert--"your care is needless--your complaints are
without reason--your fears on my account are in vain."

"Nay, but hear me, brother," said Edward. "Your speech in sleep, and
now even your waking dreams, are of beings which belong not to this
world, or to our race--Our good Father Eustace says, that howbeit we
may not do well to receive all idle tales of goblins and spectres, yet
there is warrant from holy Scripture to believe, that the fiends haunt
waste and solitary places; and that those who frequent such
wildernesses alone, are the prey, or the sport, of these wandering
demons. And therefore, I pray thee, brother, let me go with you when
you go next up the glen, where, as you well know, there be places of
evil reputation--Thou carest not for my escort; but, Halbert, such
dangers are more safely encountered by the wise in judgment, than by
the bold in bosom; and though I have small cause to boast of my own
wisdom, yet I have that which ariseth from the written knowledge of
elder times."

There was a moment during this discourse, when Halbert had well-nigh
come to the resolution of disburdening his own breast, by intrusting
Edward with all that weighed upon it. But when his brother reminded
him that this was the morning of a high holiday, and that, setting
aside all other business or pleasure, he ought to go to the Monastery
and shrive himself before Father Eustace, who would that day occupy
the confessional, pride stepped in and confirmed his wavering
resolution. "I will not avow," he thought, "a tale so extraordinary,
that I may be considered as an impostor or something worse--I will not
fly from this Englishman, whose arm and sword may be no better than my
own. My fathers have faced his betters, were he as much distinguished
in battle as he is by his quaint discourse."

Pride, which has been said to save man, and woman too, from falling,
has yet a stronger influence on the mind when it embraces the cause of
passion, and seldom fails to render it victorious over conscience and
reason. Halbert, once determined, though not to the better course, at
length slept soundly, and was only awakened by the dawn of day.

       *       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-First.


  Indifferent, but indifferent--pshaw, he doth it not
  Like one who is his craft's master--ne'er the less
  I have seen a clown confer a bloody coxcomb
  On one who was a master of defence.
                                      OLD PLAY.

With the first gray peep of dawn, Halbert Glendinning arose and
hastened to dress himself, girded on his weapon, and took a cross-bow
in his hand, as if his usual sport had been his sole object. He groped
his way down the dark and winding staircase, and undid, with as little
noise as possible, the fastenings of the inner door, and of the
exterior iron grate.  At length he stood free in the court-yard, and
looking up to the tower, saw a signal made with a handkerchief from
the window. Nothing doubting that it was his antagonist, he paused,
expecting him. But it was Mary Avenel, who glided like a spirit from
under the low and rugged portal.

Halbert was much surprised, and felt, he knew not why, like one caught
in the act of a meditated trespass. The presence of Mary Avenel had till
that moment never given him pain. She spoke, too, in a tone where sorrow
seemed to mingle with reproach, while she asked him with emphasis,
"What he was about to do?"

He showed his cross-bow, and was about to express the pretext he had
meditated, when Mary interrupted him.

"Not so, Halbert--that evasion were unworthy of one whose word has
hitherto been truth. You meditate not the destruction of the deer--your
hand and your heart are aimed at other game--you seek to do battle with
this stranger."

"And wherefore should I quarrel with our guest?" answered Halbert,
blushing deeply.

"There are, indeed, many reasons why you should not," replied the
maiden, "nor is there one of avail wherefore you should--yet
nevertheless, such a quarrel you are now searching after."

"Why should you suppose so, Mary?" said Halbert, endeavouring to hide
his conscious purpose--"he is my mother's guest--he is protected by
the Abbot and the community, who are our masters--he is of high degree
also,--and wherefore should you think that I can, or dare, resent a
hasty word, which he has perchance thrown out against me more from the
wantonness of his wit, than the purpose of his heart?"

"Alas!" answered the maiden, "the very asking that question puts your
resolution beyond a doubt. Since your childhood you were ever daring,
seeking danger rather than avoiding it--delighting in whatever had the
air of adventure and of courage: and it is not from fear that you will
now blench from your purpose--Oh, let it then be from pity!--from
pity, Halbert, to your aged mother, whom your death or victory will
alike deprive of the comfort and stay of her age."

"She has my brother Edward," said Halbert, turning suddenly from her.

"She has indeed," said Mary Avenel, "the calm, the noble-minded, the
considerate Edward, who has thy courage, Halbert, without thy fiery
rashness,--thy generous spirit, with more of reason to guide it. He
would not have heard his mother, would not have heard his adopted
sister, beseech him in vain not to ruin himself, and tear up their
future hopes of happiness and protection."

Halbert's heart swelled as he replied to this reproach. "Well--what
avails it speaking?--you have him that is better than me--wiser, more
considerate--braver, for aught I know--you are provided with a
protector, and need care no more for me."

Again he turned to depart, but Mary Avenel laid her hand on his arm so
gently that he scarce felt her hold, yet felt that it was impossible
for him to strike it off. There he stood, one foot advanced to leave
the court-yard, but so little determined on departure, that he
resembled a traveller arrested by the spell of a magician, and unable
either to quit the attitude of motion, or to proceed on his course.

Mary Avenel availed herself of his state of suspense. "Hear me," she
said, "hear me, Halbert!--I am an orphan, and even Heaven hears the
orphan--I have been the companion of your infancy, and if _you_
will not hear me for an instant, from whom may Mary Avenel claim so
poor a boon?"

"I hear you," said Halbert Glendinning, "but be brief, dear Mary--you
mistake the nature of my business--it is but a morning of summer sport
which we propose."

"Say not thus," said the maiden, interrupting him, "say not thus to me
--others thou mayst deceive, but me thou canst not--There has been
that in me from the earliest youth, which fraud flies from, and which
imposture cannot deceive. For what fate has given me such a power I
know not; but bred an ignorant maiden, in this sequestered valley,
mine eyes can too often see what man would most willingly hide--I can
judge of the dark purpose, though it is hid under the smiling brow,
and a glance of the eye says more to me than oaths and protestations
do to others."

"Then," said Halbert, "if thou canst so read the human heart,--say,
dear Mary--what dost thou see in mine?--tell me that--say that what
thou seest--what thou readest in this bosom, does not offend thee--say
but _that_, and thou shalt be the guide of my actions, and mould
me now and henceforward to honour or to dishonour at thy own free
will!"

Mary Avenel became first red, and then deadly pale, as Halbert
Glendinning spoke. But when, turning round at the close of his
address, he took her hand, she gently withdrew it, and replied, "I
cannot read the heart, Halbert, and I would not of my will know aught
of yours, save what beseems us both--I only can judge of signs, words,
and actions of little outward import, more truly than those around me,
as my eyes, thou knowest, have seen objects not presented to those of
others."

"Let them gaze then on one whom they shall never see more," said
Halbert, once more turning from her, and rushing out of the court-yard
without again looking back.

Mary Avenel gave a faint scream, and clasped both her hands firmly on
her forehead and eyes. She had been a minute in this attitude, when
she was thus greeted by a voice from behind: "Generously done, my most
clement Discretion, to hide those brilliant eyes from the far inferior
beams which even now begin to gild the eastern horizon--Certes, peril
there were that Phoebus, outshone in splendour, might in very
shamefacedness turn back his ear, and rather leave the world in
darkness, than incur the disgrace of such an encounter--Credit me,
lovely Discretion--"

But as Sir Piercie Shafton (the reader will readily set down these
flowers of eloquence to the proper owner) attempted to take Mary
Avenel's hand, in order to proceed in his speech, she shook him
abruptly off, and regarding him with an eye which evinced terror and
agitation, rushed past him into the tower.

The knight stood looking after her with a countenance in which
contempt was strongly mingled with mortification. "By my knighthood!"
he ejaculated, "I have thrown away upon this rude rustic Phidel? a
speech, which the proudest beauty at the court of Felicia (so let me
call the Elysium from which I am banished!) might have termed the very
matins of Cupid. Hard and inexorable was the fate that sent thee
thither, Piercie Shafton, to waste thy wit upon country wenches, and
thy valour upon hob-nailed clowns!  But that insult--that affront--had
it been offered to me by the lowest plebeian, he must have died for it
by my hand, in respect the enormity of the offence doth countervail
the inequality of him by whom it is given. I trust I shall find this
clownish roisterer not less willing to deal in blows than in taunts."

While he held this conversation with himself, Sir Piercie Shafton was
hastening to the little tuft of birch-trees which had been assigned as
the place of meeting. He greeted his antagonist with a courtly
salutation, followed by this commentary: "I pray you to observe, that
I doff my hat to you, though so much my inferior in rank, without
derogation on my part, inasmuch as my having so far honoured you in
receiving and admitting your defiance, doth, in the judgment of the
best martialists, in some sort and for the time, raise you to a level
with me--an honour which you may and ought to account cheaply
purchased, even with the loss of your life, if such should chance to
be the issue of this duello."

"For which condescension," said Halbert, "I have to thank the token
which I presented to you."

The knight changed colour, and grinded his teeth with rage--"Draw your
weapon!" said he to Glendinning.

"Not in this spot," answered the youth; "we should be liable to
interruption--Follow me, and I will bring you to a place where we
shall encounter no such risk."

He proceeded to walk up the glen, resolving that their place of combat
should be in the entrance of the Corri-nan-shian; both because the
spot, lying under the reputation of being haunted, was very little
frequented, and also because he regarded it as a place which to him
might be termed fated, and which he therefore resolved should witness
his death or victory.  They walked up the glen for some time in
silence, like honourable enemies who did not wish to contend with
words, and who had nothing friendly to exchange with each other.
Silence, however, was always an irksome state with Sir Piercie and,
moreover, his anger was usually a hasty and short-lived passion. As,
therefore, he went forth, in his own idea, in all love and honour
towards his antagonist, he saw not any cause for submitting longer to
the painful restraint of positive silence. He began by complimenting
Halbert on the alert activity with which he surmounted the obstacles
and impediments of the way.

"Trust me," said he, "worthy rustic, we have not a lighter or a firmer
step in our courtlike revels, and if duly set forth by a silk hose,
and trained unto that stately exercise, your leg would make an
indifferent good show in a pavin or a galliard. And I doubt nothing,"
he added, "that you have availed yourself of some opportunity to
improve yourself in the art of fence, which is more akin than dancing
to our present purpose?"

"I know nothing more of fencing," said Halbert, "than hath been taught
me by an old shepherd of ours, called Martin, and at whiles a lesson
from Christie of the Clinthill--for the rest, I must trust to good
sword, strong arm, and sound heart."

"Marry and I am glad of it, young Audacity, (I will call you my
Audacity, and you will call me your Condescension, while we are on
these terms of unnatural equality,) I am glad of your ignorance with
all my heart. For we martialists proportion the punishments which we
inflict upon our opposites, to the length and hazard of the efforts
wherewith they oppose themselves to us. And I see not why you, being
but a tyro, may not be held sufficiently punished for your
outrecuidance, and orgillous presumption, by the loss of an ear, an
eye, or even a finger, accompanied by some flesh-wound of depth and
severity, suited to your error--whereas, had you been able to stand
more effectually on your defence, I see not how less than your life
could have atoned sufficiently for your presumption."

"Now, by God and Our Lady," said Halbert, unable any longer to
restrain himself, "thou art thyself over-presumptuous, who speakest
thus daringly of the issue of a combat which is not yet even
begun--Are you a god, that you already dispose of my life and limbs?
or are you a judge in the justice-air, telling at your ease and
without risk, how the head and quarters of a condemned criminal are to
be disposed of?"

"Not so, O thou,--whom I have well permitted to call thyself my
Audacity.  I, thy Condescension, am neither a god to judge the issue
of the combat before it is fought, nor a judge to dispose at my ease
and in safety of the limbs and head of a condemned criminal; but I am
an indifferent good master of fence, being the first pupil of the
first master of the first school of fence that our royal England
affords, the said master being no other than the truly noble, and
all-unutterably skilful Vincentio Saviola, from whom I learned the
firm step, quick eye, and nimble hand--of which qualities thou, O my
most rustical Audacity, art full like to reap the fruits so soon as we
shall find a piece of ground fitting for such experiments."

They had now reached the gorge of the ravine, where Halbert had at
first intended to stop; but when he observed the narrowness of the
level ground, he began to consider that it was only by superior
agility that he could expect to make up his deficiency in the science,
as it was called, of defence. He found no spot which afforded
sufficient room to traverse for this purpose, until he gained the
well-known fountain, by whose margin, and in front of the huge rock
from which it sprung, was an amphitheatre of level turf, of small
space indeed, compared with the great height of the cliffs with which
it was surrounded on every point save that from which the rivulet
issued forth, yet large enough for their present purpose.

When they had reached this spot of ground, fitted well by its gloom
and sequestered situation to be a scene of mortal strife, both were
surprised to observe that a grave was dug close by the foot of the
rock with great neatness and regularity, the green turf being laid
down upon the one side, and the earth thrown out in a heap upon the
other. A mattock and shovel lay by the verge of the grave.

Sir Piercie Shafton bent his eye with unusual seriousness upon Halbert
Glendinning, as he asked him sternly, "Does this bode treason, young
man? And have you purpose to set upon me here as in an emboscata or
place of vantage?"

"Not on my part, by Heaven!" answered the youth: "I told no one of our
purpose, nor would I for the throne of Scotland take odds against a
single arm."

"I believe thou wouldst not, mine Audacity," said the knight, resuming
the affected manner which was become a second nature to him;
"nevertheless this fosse is curiously well shaped, and might be the
masterpiece of Nature's last bed-maker, I would say the
sexton--Wherefore, let us be thankful to chance or some unknown
friend, who hath thus provided for one of us the decencies of
sepulture, and let us proceed to determine which shall have the
advantage of enjoying this place of undisturbed slumber."

So saying, he stripped off his doublet and cloak, which he folded up
with great care, and deposited upon a large stone, while Halbert
Glendinning, not without some emotion, followed his example. Their
vicinity to the favourite haunt of the White Lady led him to form
conjectures concerning the incident of the grave--"It must have been
her work!" he thought: "the Spirit foresaw and has provided for the
fatal event of the combat--I must return from this place a homicide,
or I must remain here for ever!"

The bridge seemed now broken down behind him, and the chance of coming
off honourably without killing or being killed, (the hope of which
issue has cheered the sinking heart of many a duellist,) seemed now
altogether to be removed. Yet the very desperation of his situation
gave him, on an instant's reflection, both firmness and courage, and
presented to him one sole alternative, conquest, namely, or death.

"As we are here," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "unaccompanied by any
patrons or seconds, it were well you should pass your hands over my
sides, as I shall over yours; not that I suspect you to use any quaint
device of privy armour, but in order to comply with the ancient and
laudable custom practised on all such occasions."

While complying with his antagonist's humour, Halbert Glendinning went
through this ceremony, Sir Piercie Shafton did not fail to solicit his
attention to the quality and fineness of his wrought and embroidered
shirt--"In this very shirt," said he, "O mine Audacity!--I say in this
very garment, in which I am now to combat a Scottish rustic like
thyself, it was my envied lot to lead the winning party at that
wonderous match at ballon, made betwixt the divine Astrophel, (our
matchless Sidney,) and the right honourable my very good lord of
Oxford. All the beauties of Felicia (by which name I distinguish our
beloved England) stood in the gallery, waving their kerchiefs at each
turn of the game, and cheering the winners by their plaudits. After
which noble sport we were refreshed by a suitable banquet, whereat it
pleased the noble Urania (being the unmatched Countess of Pembroke) to
accommodate me with her fan for the cooling my somewhat too much
inflamed visage, to requite which courtesy, I said, casting my
features into a smiling, yet melancholy fashion, O divinest Urania!
receive again that too fatal gift, which not like the Zephyr cooleth,
but like the hot breath of the Sirocco, heateth yet more that which is
already inflamed. Whereupon, looking upon me somewhat scornfully, yet
not so but what the experienced courtier might perceive a certain cast
of approbative affection----"

Here the knight was interrupted by Halbert, who had waited with
courteous patience for some little time, till he found, that far from
drawing to a close, Sir Piercie seemed rather inclined to wax prolix
in his reminiscences.

"Sir Knight," said the youth, "if this matter be not very much to the
purpose, we will, if you object not, proceed to that which we have in
hand.  You should have abidden in England had you desired to waste
time in words, for here we spend it in blows."

"I crave your pardon, most rusticated Audacity," answered Sir Piercie;
"truly I become oblivious of every thing beside, when the
recollections of the divine court of Felicia press upon my wakened
memory, even as a saint is dazzled when he bethinks him of the
beatific vision. Ah, felicitous Feliciana!  delicate nurse of the
fair, chosen abode of the wise, the birth-place and cradle of
nobility, the temple of courtesy, the fane of sprightly chivalry--Ah,
heavenly court, or rather courtly heaven! cheered with dances, lulled
asleep with harmony, wakened with sprightly sports and tourneys,
decored with silks and tissues, glittering with diamonds and jewels,
standing on end with double-piled velvets, satins, and satinettas!"

"The token, Sir Knight, the token!" exclaimed Halbert Glendinning,
who, impatient of Sir Piercie's interminable oratory, reminded him of
the ground of their quarrel, as the best way to compel him to the
purpose of their meeting.

And he judged right; for Sir Piercie Shafton no sooner heard him
speak, than he exclaimed, "Thy death-hour has struck--betake thee to
thy sword--Via!"

Both swords were unsheathed, and the combatants commenced their
engagement. Halbert became immediately aware, that, as he had
expected, he was far inferior to his adversary in the use of his
weapon. Sir Piercie Shafton had taken no more than his own share of
real merit, when he termed himself an absolutely good fencer; and
Glendinning soon found that he should have great difficulty in
escaping with life and honour from such a master of the sword. The
English knight was master of all the mystery of the _stoccata,
imbrocata, punto-reverso, incartata_, and so forth, which the
Italian masters of defence had lately introduced into general
practice. But Glendinning, on his part, was no novice in the
principles of the art, according to the old Scottish fashion, and
possessed the first of all qualities, a steady and collected mind. At
first, being desirous to try the skill, and become acquainted with the
play of his enemy, he stood on his defence, keeping his foot, hand,
eye, and body, in perfect unison, and holding his sword short, and
with the point towards his antagonist's face, so that Sir Piercie, in
order to assail him, was obliged to make actual passes, and could not
avail himself of his skill in making feints; while, on the other hand,
Halbert was prompt to parry these attacks, either by shifting his
ground or with the sword. The consequence was, that after two or three
sharp attempts on the part of Sir Piercie, which were evaded or
disconcerted by the address of his opponent, he began to assume the
defensive in his turn, fearful of giving some advantage by being
repeatedly the assailant. But Halbert was too cautious to press on a
swordsman whose dexterity had already more than once placed him within
a hair's breadth of death, which he had only escaped by uncommon
watchfulness and agility.

When each had made a feint or two, there was a pause in the conflict,
both as if by one assent dropping their swords' point, and looking on
each other for a moment without speaking. At length Halbert
Glendinning, who felt perhaps more uneasy on account of his family
than he had done before he had displayed his own courage, and proved
the strength of his antagonist, could not help saying, "Is the subject
of our quarrel, Sir Knight, so mortal, that one of our two bodies must
needs fill up that grave? or may we with honour, having proved
ourselves against each other, sheathe our swords and depart friends?"

"Valiant and most rustical Audacity," said the Southron knight, "to no
man on earth could you have put a question on the code of honour, who
was more capable of rendering you a reason. Let us pause for the space
of one venue, until I give you my opinion on this dependence,
[Footnote: _Dependence_--A phrase among the brethren of the sword
for an existing quarrel.] for certain it is, that brave men should not
run upon their fate like brute and furious wild beasts, but should
slay each other deliberately, decently, and with reason.  Therefore,
if we coolly examine the state of our dependence, we may the better
apprehend whether the sisters three have doomed one of us to expiate
the same with his blood--Dost thou understand me?"

"I have heard Father Eustace," said Halbert, after a moment's
recollection, "speak of the three furies, with their thread and their
shears."

"Enough--enough,"--interrupted Sir Piercie Shafton, crimsoning with
a new fit of rage, "the thread of thy life is spun!"

And with these words he attacked with the utmost ferocity the Scottish
youth, who had but just time to throw himself into a posture of
defence.  But the rash fury of the assailant, as frequently happens,
disappointed its own purpose; for, as he made a desperate thrust,
Halbert Glendinning avoided it, and ere the knight could recover his
weapon, requited him (to use his own language) with a resolute
stoccata, which passed through his body, and Sir Piercie Shafton fell
to the ground.

        *       *       *      *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Second.


  Yes, life hath left him--every busy thought,
  Each fiery passion, every strong affection,
  All sense of outward ill and inward sorrow,
  Are fled at once from the pale trunk before me;
  And I have given that which spoke and moved,
  Thought, acted, suffer'd as a living man,
  To be a ghastly form of bloody clay,
  Soon the foul food for reptiles.
                                        OLD PLAY.

I believe few successful duellists (if the word successful can be
applied to a superiority so fatal) have beheld their dead antagonist
stretched on the earth at their feet, without wishing they could
redeem with their own blood that which it has been their fate to
spill. Least of all could such indifference be the lot of so young a
man as Halbert Glendinning, who, unused to the sight of human blood,
was not only struck with sorrow, but with terror, when he beheld Sir
Piercie Shafton lie stretched on the green-sward before him, vomiting
gore as if impelled by the strokes of a pump. He threw his bloody
sword on the ground, and hastened to kneel and support him, vainly
striving, at the same time, to stanch his wound, which seemed rather
to bleed inwardly than externally.

The unfortunate knight spoke at intervals, when the syncope would
permit him, and his words, so far as intelligible, partook of his
affected and conceited, yet not ungenerous character.

"Most rustical youth," he said, "thy fortune hath prevailed over
knightly skill--and Audacity hath overcome Condescension, even as the
kite hath sometimes hawked at and struck down the falcon-gentle.--Fly
and save thyself!--Take my purse--it is in the nether pocket of my
carnation-coloured hose--and is worth a clown's acceptance. See that
my mails, with my vestments, be sent to the Monastery of Saint
Mary's"--(here his voice grew weak, and his mind and recollection
seemed to waver)--"I bestow the cut velvet jerkin, with close breeches
conforming--for--oh!--the good of my soul."

"Be of good comfort, sir," said Halbert, half distracted with his agony
of pity and remorse. "I trust you shall yet do well--Oh for a leech!"

"Were there twenty physicians, O most generous Audacity, and that were
a grave spectacle--I might not survive, my life is ebbing
fast.--Commend me to the rustical nymph whom I called my Discretion--O
Claridiana!--true empress of this bleeding heart--which now bleedeth
in sad earnest!--Place me on the ground at my length, most rustical
victor, born to quench the pride of the burning light of the most
felicitous court of Feliciana--O saints and angels---knights and
ladies--masques and theatres--quaint devices--chain-work and
broidery--love, honour, and beauty!----"

While muttering these last words, which slid from him, as it were
unawares, while doubtless he was calling to mind the glories of the
English court, the gallant Sir Piercie Shafton stretched out his
limbs--groaned deeply, shut his eyes, and became motionless.

The victor tore his hair for very sorrow, as he looked on the pale
countenance of his victim. Life, he thought, had not utterly fled, but
without better aid than his own, he saw not how it could be preserved.

"Why," he exclaimed in vain penitence, "why did I provoke him to an
issue so fatal! Would to God I had submitted to the worst insult man
could receive from man, rather than be the bloody instrument of this
bloody deed--and doubly cursed be this evil-boding spot, which,
haunted as I knew it to be by a witch or a devil, I yet chose for the
place of combat! In any other place, save this, there had been help to
be gotten by speed of foot, or by uplifting of voice--but here there
is no one to be found by search, no one to hear my shouts, save the
evil spirit who has counselled this mischief.  It is not her hour--I
will essay the spell howsoever; and if she can give me aid, she
_shall_ do it, or know of what a madman is capable even against
those of another world!"

He spurned his bloody shoe from his foot, and repeated the spell with
which the reader is well acquainted; but there was neither voice,
apparition, nor signal of answer. The youth, in the impatience of his
despair, and with the rash hardihood which formed the basis of his
character, shouted aloud, "Witch--Sorceress--Fiend!--art thou deaf to
my cries of help, and so ready to appear and answer those of
vengeance? Arise and speak to me, or I will choke up thy fountain,
tear down thy hollybush, and leave thy haunt as waste and bare as thy
fatal assistance has made me waste of comfort and bare of
counsel!"--This furious and raving invocation was suddenly interrupted
by a distant sound, resembling a hollo, from the gorge of the ravine.
"Now may Saint Mary be praised," said the youth, hastily fastening his
sandal, "I hear the voice of some living man, who may give me counsel
and help in this fearful extremity."

Having donned his sandal, Halbert Glendinning, hallooing at intervals,
in answer to the sound which he had heard, ran with the speed of a
hunted buck down the rugged defile, as if paradise had been before
him, hell and all her furies behind, and his eternal happiness or
misery had depended upon the speed which he exerted. In a space
incredibly short for any one but a Scottish mountaineer having his
nerves strung by the deepest and most passionate interest, the youth
reached the entrance of the ravine, through which the rill that flows
down Corri-nan-shian discharges itself, and unites with the brook that
waters the little valley of Glendearg.

Here he paused, and looked around him upwards and downwards through
the glen, without perceiving a human form. His heart sank within him.
But the windings of the glen intercepted his prospect, and the person,
whose voice he had heard, might therefore, be at no great distance,
though not obvious to his sight. The branches of an oak-tree, which
shot straight out from the face of a tall cliff, proffered to his bold
spirit, steady head, and active limbs, the means of ascending it as a
place of out-look, although the enterprise was what most men would
have shrunk from. But by one bound from the earth, the active youth
caught hold of the lower branch, and swung himself up into the tree,
and in a minute more gained the top of the cliff, from which he could
easily descry a human figure descending the valley.  It was not that
of a shepherd, or of a hunter, and scarcely any others used to
traverse this deserted solitude, especially coming from the north,
since the reader may remember that the brook took its rise from an
extensive and dangerous morass which lay in that direction.

But Halbert Glendinning did not pause to consider who the traveller
might be, or what might be the purpose of his journey. To know that he
saw a human being, and might receive, in the extremity of his
distress, the countenance and advice of a fellow-creature, was enough
for him at the moment. He threw himself from the pinnacle of the cliff
once more into the arms of the projecting oak-tree, whose boughs waved
in middle air, anchored by the roots in a huge rift or chasm of the
rock. Catching at the branch which was nearest to him, he dropped
himself from that height upon the ground; and such was the athletic
springiness of his youthful sinews, that he pitched there as lightly,
and with as little injury, as the falcon stooping from her wheel.

To resume his race at full speed up the glen, was the work of an
instant; and as he turned angle after angle of the indented banks of
the valley, without meeting that which he sought, he became half
afraid that the form which he had seen at such a distance had already
melted into thin air, and was either a deception of his own
imagination, or of the elementary spirits by which the valley was
supposed to be haunted.

But to his inexpressible joy, as he turned round the base of a huge
and distinguished crag, he saw, straight before and very near to him,
a person, whose dress, as he viewed it hastily, resembled that of a
pilgrim.

He was a man of advanced life, and wearing a long beard, having on his
head a large slouched hat, without either band or brooch. His dress
was a tunic of black serge, which, like those commonly called
hussar-cloaks, had an upper part, which covered the arms and fell down
on the lower; a small scrip and bottle, which hung at his back, with a
stout staff in his hand, completed his equipage. His step was feeble,
like that of one exhausted by a toilsome journey.

"Save ye, good father!" said the youth. "God and Our Lady have sent
you to my assistance."

"And in what, my son, can so frail a creature as I am, be of service
to you?" said the old man, not a little surprised at being thus
accosted by so handsome a youth, his features discomposed by anxiety,
his face flushed with exertion, his hands and much of his dress
stained with blood.  "A man bleeds to death in the valley here, hard
by. Come with me--come with me! You are aged--you have
experience--you have at least your senses--and mine have well nigh
left me."

"A man--and bleeding to death--and here in this desolate spot!" said
the stranger.

"Stay not to question it, father," said the youth, "but come instantly
to his rescue. Follow me,--follow me, without an instant's delay."

"Nay, but, my son," said the old man, "we do not lightly follow the
guides who present themselves thus suddenly in the bosom of a howling
wilderness. Ere I follow thee, thou must expound to me thy name, thy
purpose, and thy cause."

"There is no time to expound any thing," said Halbert; "I tell thee a
man's life is at stake, and thou must come to aid him, or I will carry
thee thither by force!"

"Nay, thou shalt not need," said the traveller; "if it indeed be as
thou sayest, I will follow thee of free-will--the rather that I am not
wholly unskilled in leech-craft, and have in my scrip that which may
do thy friend a service--Yet walk more slowly, I pray thee, for I am
already well-nigh forespent with travel."

With the indignant impatience of the fiery steed when compelled by his
rider to keep pace with some slow drudge upon the highway, Halbert
accompanied the wayfarer, burning with anxiety which he endeavoured to
subdue, that he might not alarm his companion, who was obviously
afraid to trust him. When they reached the place where they were to
turn off the wider glen into the Corri, the traveller made a doubtful
pause, as if unwilling to leave the broader path--"Young man," he
said, "if thou meanest aught but good to these gray hairs, thou wilt
gain little by thy cruelty--I have no earthly treasure to tempt either
robber or murderer."

"And I," said the youth, "am neither--and yet--God of Heaven!--I
_may_ be a murderer, unless your aid comes in time to this
wounded wretch!"

"Is it even so," said the traveller; "and do human passions disturb the
breast of nature, even in her deepest solitude?--Yet why should I marvel
that where darkness abides the works of darkness should abound?--By its
fruits is the tree known--Lead on, unhappy youth--I follow thee!"

And with better will to the journey than he had evinced hitherto, the
stranger exerted himself to the uttermost, and seemed to forget his own
fatigue in his efforts to keep pace with his impatient guide.

What was the surprise of Halbert Glendinning, when, upon arriving at
the fatal spot, he saw no appearance of the body of Sir Piercie
Shafton!  The traces of the fray were otherwise sufficiently visible.
The knight's cloak had indeed vanished as well as his body, but his
doublet remained where he had laid it down, and the turf on which he
had been stretched was stained with blood in many a dark crimson spot.

As he gazed round him in terror and astonishment, Halbert's eyes fell
upon the place of sepulture which had so lately appeared to gape for a
victim. It was no longer open, and it seemed that earth had received
the expected tenant; for the usual narrow hillock was piled over what
had lately been an open grave, and the green sod was adjusted over all
with the accuracy of an experienced sexton. Halbert stood aghast. The
idea rushed on his mind irresistibly, that the earth-heap before him
enclosed what had lately been a living, moving, and sentient
fellow-creature, whom, on little provocation, his fell act had reduced
to a clod of the valley, as senseless and as cold as the turf under
which he rested. The hand that scooped the grave had completed its
word; and whose hand could it be save that of the mysterious being of
doubtful quality, whom his rashness had invoked, and whom he had
suffered to intermingle in his destinies?

As he stood with clasped hands and uplifted eyes, bitterly ruing his
rashness, he was roused by the voice of the stranger, whose suspicions
of his guide had again been awakened by finding the scene so different
from what Halbert had led him to expect.--"Young man," he said, "hast
thou baited thy tongue with falsehood to cut perhaps only a few days
from the life of one whom Nature will soon call home, without guilt on
thy part to hasten his journey?"

"By the blessed Heaven!--by our dear Lady!" ejaculated Halbert--

"Swear not at all!" said the stranger, interrupting him, "neither by
Heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by earth, for it is his
footstool--nor by the creatures whom he hath made, for they are but
earth and clay as we are. Let thy yea be yea, and thy nay, nay. Tell
me in a word, why and for what purpose thou hast feigned a tale, to
lead a bewildered traveller yet farther astray?"

"As I am a Christian man," said Glendinning, "I left him here bleeding
to death--and now I nowhere spy him, and much I doubt that the tomb
that thou seest has closed on his mortal remains."

"And who is he for whose fate thou art so anxious?" said the stranger;
"or how is it possible that this wounded man could have been either
removed from, or interred in, a place so solitary?"

"His name," said Halbert, after a moment's pause, "is Piercie
Shafton--there, on that very spot I left him bleeding; and what power
has conveyed him hence, I know no more than thou dost."

"Piercie Shafton?" said the stranger; "Sir Piercie Shafton of
Wilverton, a kinsman, as it is said, of the great Piercie of
Northumberland? If thou hast slain him, to return to the territories
of the proud Abbot is to give thy neck to the gallows. He is well
known, that Piercie Shafton; the meddling tool of wiser plotters--a
harebrained trafficker in treason--a champion of the Pope, employed as
a forlorn hope by those more politic heads, who have more will to work
mischief, than valour to encounter danger.--Come with me, youth, and
save thyself from the evil consequences of this deed--Guide me to the
Castle of Avenel, and thy reward shall be protection and safety."

Again Halbert paused, and summoned his mind to a hasty council. The
vengeance with which the Abbot was likely to visit the slaughter of
Shafton, his friend, and in some measure his guest, was likely to be
severe; yet, in the various contingencies which he had considered
previous to their duel, he had unaccountably omitted to reflect what
was to be his line of conduct in case of Sir Piercie falling by his
hand. If he returned to Glendearg, he was sure to draw on his whole
family, including Mary Avenel, the resentment of the Abbot and
community, whereas it was possible that flight might make him be
regarded as the sole author of the deed, and might avert the
indignation of the monks from the rest of the inhabitants of his
paternal tower. Halbert recollected also the favour expressed for the
household, and especially for Edward, by the Sub-Prior; and he
conceived that he could, by communicating his own guilt to that worthy
ecclesiastic, when at a distance from Glendearg, secure his powerful
interposition in favour of his family. These thoughts rapidly passed
through his mind, and he determined on flight. The stranger's company
and his promised protection came in aid of that resolution; but he was
unable to reconcile the invitation which the old man gave him to
accompany him for safety to the Castle of Avenel, with the connexions
of Julian, the present usurper of that inheritance.

"Good father," he said, "I fear that you mistake the man with whom you
wish me to harbour. Avenel guided Piercie Shafton into Scotland, and
his henchman, Christie of the Clinthill, brought the Southron hither."

"Of that," said the old man, "I am well aware. Yet if thou wilt trust
to me, as I have shown no reluctance to confide in thee, thou shalt
find with Julian Avenel welcome, or at least safety."

"Father," replied Halbert, "though I can ill reconcile what thou
sayest with what Julian Avenel hath done, yet caring little about the
safety of a creature so lost as myself, and as thy words seem those of
truth and honesty, and finally, as thou didst render thyself frankly
up to my conduct, I will return the confidence thou hast shown, and
accompany thee to the Castle of Avenel by a road which thou thyself
couldst never have discovered." He led the way, and the old man
followed for some time in silence.

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Third.


  'Tis when the wound is stiffening with the cold.
  The warrior first feels pain--'tis when the heat
  And fiery fever of his soul is pass'd,
  The sinner feels remorse.
                               OLD PLAY.

The feelings of compunction with which Halbert Glendinning was visited
upon this painful occasion, were deeper than belonged to an age and
country in which human life was held so cheap. They fell far short
certainly of those which might have afflicted a mind regulated by
better religious precepts, and more strictly trained under social
laws; but still they were deep and severely felt, and divided in
Halbert's heart even the regret with which he parted from Mary Avenel
and the tower of his fathers.

The old traveller walked silently by his side for some time, and then
addressed him.--"My son, it has been said that sorrow must speak or
die--Why art thou so much cast down?--Tell me thy unhappy tale, and it
may be that my gray head may devise counsel and aid for your young
life."

"Alas !" said Halbert Glendinning, "can you wonder why I am cast
down?--I am at this instant a fugitive from my father's house, from my
mother, and from my friends, and I bear on my head the blood of a man
who injured me but in idle words, which I have thus bloodily requited.
My heart now tells me I have done evil--it were harder than these
rocks if it could bear unmoved the thought, that I have sent this man
to a long account, unhousled and unshrieved."

"Pause there, my son," said the traveller. "That thou hast defaced
God's image in thy neighbour's person--that thou hast sent dust to
dust in idle wrath or idler pride, is indeed a sin of the deepest
dye--that thou hast cut short the space which Heaven might have
allowed him for repentance, makes it yet more deadly--but for all this
there is balm in Gilead."

"I understand you not, father," said Halbert, struck by the solemn tone
which was assumed by his companion.

The old man proceeded. "Thou hast slain thine enemy--it was a cruel
deed: thou hast cut him off perchance in his sins--it is a fearful
aggravation.  Do yet by my counsel, and in lieu of him whom thou hast
perchance consigned to the kingdom of Satan, let thine efforts wrest
another subject from the reign of the Evil One."

"I understand you, father," said Halbert; "thou wouldst have me atone
for my rashness by doing service to the soul of my adversary--But how
may this be? I have no money to purchase masses, and gladly would I
go barefoot to the Holy Land to free his spirit from purgatory, only
that--"

"My son," said the old man, interrupting him, "the sinner for whose
redemption I entreat you to labour, is not the dead but the living. It
is not for the soul of thine enemy I would exhort thee to pray--that
has already had its final doom from a Judge as merciful as he is just;
nor, wert thou to coin that rock into ducats, and obtain a mass for
each one, would it avail the departed spirit. Where the tree hath
fallen, it must lie.  But the sapling, which hath in it yet the vigour
and juice of life, may be bended to the point to which it ought to
incline."

"Art thou a priest, father?" said the young man, "or by what commission
dost thou talk of such high matters?"

"By that of my Almighty Master," said the traveller, "under whose
banner I am an enlisted soldier."

Halbert's acquaintance with religious matters was no deeper than could
be derived from the Archbishop of Saint Andrew's Catechism, and the
pamphlet called the Twapennie Faith, both which were industriously
circulated and recommended by the monks of Saint Mary's. Yet, however
indifferent and superficial a theologian, he began to suspect that he
was now in company with one of the gospellers, or heretics, before
whose influence the ancient system of religion now tottered to the
very foundation. Bred up, as may well be presumed, in a holy horror
against these formidable sectaries, the youth's first feelings were
those of a loyal and devoted church vassal. "Old man," he said, "wert
thou able to make good with thy hand the words that thy tongue hath
spoken against our Holy Mother Church, we should have tried upon this
moor which of our creeds hath the better champion."

"Nay," said the stranger, "if thou art a true soldier of Rome, thou
wilt not pause from thy purpose because thou hast the odds of years
and of strength on thy side. Hearken to me, my son. I have showed thee
how to make thy peace with Heaven, and thou hast rejected my proffer.
I will now show thee how thou shalt make thy reconciliation with the
powers of this world. Take this gray head from the frail body which
supports it, and carry it to the chair of proud Abbot Boniface; and
when thou tellest him thou hast slain Piercie Shafton, and his ire
rises at the deed, lay the head of Henry Warden at his foot, and thou
shalt have praise instead of censure."

Halbert Glendinning stepped back in surprise. "What! are you that
Henry Warden so famous among the heretics, that even Knox's name is
scarce more frequently in their mouths? Art thou he, and darest thou to
approach the Halidome of Saint Mary's?"

"I am Henry Warden, of a surety," said the old man, "far unworthy to
be named in the same breath with Knox, but yet willing to venture on
whatever dangers my master's service may call me to."

"Hearken to me, then," said Halbert; "to slay thee, I have no
heart--to make thee prisoner, were equally to bring thy blood on my
head--to leave thee in this wild without a guide, were little better.
I will conduct thee, as I promised, in safety to the Castle of Avenel;
but breathe not, while we are on the journey, a word against the
doctrines of the holy church of which I am an unworthy--but though an
ignorant, a zealous member.--When thou art there arrived, beware of
thyself--there is a high price upon thy head, and Julian Avenel loves
the glance of gold bonnet-pieces." [Footnote: A gold coin of James V.,
the most beautiful of the Scottish series; so called because the
effigy of the sovereignty is represented wearing a bonnet.]

"Yet thou sayest not," answered the Protestant preacher, for such he
was, "that for lucre he would sell the blood of his guest?"

"Not if thou comest an invited stranger, relying on his faith," said
the youth; "evil as Julian may be, he dare not break the rites of
hospitality; for, loose as we on these marches may be in all other
ties, these are respected amongst us even to idolatry, and his nearest
relations would think it incumbent on them to spill his blood
themselves, to efface the disgrace such treason would bring upon their
name and lineage. But if thou goest self-invited, and without
assurance of safety, I promise thee thy risk is great."

"I am in God's hand," answered the preacher; "it is on His errand that
I traverse these wilds amidst dangers of every kind; while I am useful
for my master's service, they shall not prevail against me, and when,
like the barren fig-tree, I can no longer produce fruit, what imports
it when or by whom the axe is laid to the root?"

"Your courage and devotion," said Glendinning, "are worthy of a better
cause."

"That," said Warden, "cannot be--mine is the very best."

They continued their journey in silence, Halbert Glendinning tracing
with the utmost accuracy the mazes of the dangerous and intricate
morasses and hills which divided the Halidome from the barony of
Avenel. From time to time he was obliged to stop, in order to assist
his companion to cross the black intervals of quaking bog, called in
the Scottish dialect _hags_, by which the firmer parts of the
morass were intersected.

"Courage, old man," said Halbert, as he saw his companion almost
exhausted with fatigue, "we shall soon be upon hard ground. And yet
soft as this moss is, I have seen the merry falconers go through it as
light as deer when the quarry was upon the flight."

"True, my son," answered Warden, "for so I will still call you, though
you term me no longer father; and even so doth headlong youth pursue its
pleasures, without regard to the mire and the peril of the paths through
which they are hurried."

"I have already told thee," answered Halbert Glendinning, sternly, "that
I will hear nothing from thee that savours of doctrine."

"Nay, but, my son," answered Warden, "thy spiritual father himself
would surely not dispute the truth of what I have now spoken for your
edification!"

Glendinning stoutly replied, "I know not how that may be--but I wot
well it is the fashion of your brotherhood to bait your hook with fair
discourse, and to hold yourselves up as angels of light, that you may
the better extend the kingdom of darkness."

"May God," replied the preacher, "pardon those who have thus reported
of his servants! I will not offend thee, my son, by being instant out of
season--thou speakest but as thou art taught--yet sure I trust that so
goodly a youth will be still rescued, like a brand from the burning."

While he thus spoke, the verge of the morass was attained, and their
path lay on the declivity. Green-sward it was, and, viewed from a
distance, chequered with its narrow and verdant line the dark-brown
heath which it traversed, though the distinction was not so easily
traced when they were walking on it.  [Footnote: This sort of path,
visible when looked at from a distance, but not to be seen when you
are upon it, is called on the Border by the significant name of a
Blind-road.] The old man pursued his journey with comparative ease;
and, unwilling again to awaken the jealous zeal of his young companion
for the Roman faith, he discoursed on other matters. The tone of his
conversation was still grave, moral, and instructive. He had travelled
much, and knew both the language and manners of other countries,
concerning which Halbert Glendinning, already anticipating the
possibility of being obliged to leave Scotland for the deed he had
done, was naturally and anxiously desirous of information. By degrees
he was more attracted by the charms of the stranger's conversation
than repelled by the dread of his dangerous character as a heretic,
and Halbert had called him father more than once, ere the turrets of
Avenel Castle came in view.

The situation of this ancient fortress was remarkable. It occupied a
small rocky islet in a mountain lake, or _tarn,_ as such a piece
of water is called in Westmoreland. The lake might be about a mile in
circumference, surrounded by hills of considerable height, which,
except where old trees and brushwood occupied the ravines that divided
them from each other, were bare and heathy. The surprise of the
spectator was chiefly excited by finding a piece of water situated in
that high and mountainous region, and the landscape around had
features which might rather be termed wild, than either romantic or
sublime; yet the scene was not without its charms.  Under the burning
sun of summer, the clear azure of the deep unruffled lake refreshed
the eye, and impressed the mind with a pleasing feeling of deep
solitude. In winter, when the snow lay on the mountains around, these
dazzling masses appeared to ascend far beyond their wonted and natural
height, while the lake, which stretched beneath, and filled their
bosom with all its frozen waves, lay like the surface of a darkened
and broken mirror around the black and rocky islet, and the walls of
the gray castle with which it was crowned.

As the castle occupied, either with its principal buildings, or with
its flanking and outward walls, every projecting point of rock, which
served as its site, it seemed as completely surrounded by water as the
nest of a wild swan, save where a narrow causeway extended betwixt the
islet and the shore. But the fortress was larger in appearance than in
reality; and of the buildings which it actually contained, many had
become ruinous and uninhabitable. In the times of the grandeur of the
Avenel family, these had been occupied by a considerable garrison of
followers and retainers, but they were now in a great measure
deserted; and Julian Avenel would probably have fixed his habitation
in a residence better suited to his diminished fortunes, had it not
been for the great security which the situation of the old castle
afforded to a man of his precarious and perilous mode of life. Indeed,
in this respect, the spot could scarce have been more happily chosen,
for it could be rendered almost completely inaccessible at the
pleasure of the inhabitant. The distance betwixt the nearest shore and
the islet was not indeed above an hundred yards; but then the causeway
which connected them was extremely narrow, and completely divided by
two cuts, one in the mid-way between the islet and shore, and another
close under the outward gate of the castle. These formed a formidable,
and almost insurmountable interruption to any hostile approach. Each
was defended by a drawbridge, one of which, being that nearest to the
castle, was regularly raised at all times during the day, and both
were lifted at night. [Footnote: It is in vain to search near Melrose
for any such castle as is here described. The lakes at the head of the
Yarrow, and those at the rise of the water of Ale, present no object
of the kind. But in Vetholm Loch, (a romantic sheet of water, in the
dry march, as it is called,) there are the remains of a fortress
called Lochside Tower, which, like the supposed Castle of Avenel, is
built upon an island, and connected with the land by a causeway. It is
much smaller than the Castle of Avenel is described, consisting only
of a single *inous tower.]

The situation of Julian Avenel, engaged in a variety of feuds, and a
party to almost every dark and mysterious transaction which was on
foot in that wild and military frontier, required all these
precautions for his security. His own ambiguous and doubtful course of
policy had increased these dangers; for as he made professions to both
parties in the state, and occasionally united more actively with
either the one or the other, as chanced best to serve his immediate
purpose, he could not be said to have either firm allies and
protectors, or determined enemies. His life was a life of expedients
and of peril; and while, in pursuit of his interest, he made all the
doubles which he thought necessary to attain his object, he often
overran his prey, and missed that which he might have gained by
observing a straighter course.

       *      *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Fourth.


  I'll walk on tiptoe; arm my eye with caution,
  My heart with courage, and my hand with weapon,
  Like him who ventures on a lion's den.
                             OLD PLAY.

When, issuing from the gorge of a pass which terminated upon the lake,
the travellers came in sight of the ancient castle of Avenel, the old
man looked with earnest attention upon the scene before him. The
castle was, as we have said, in many places ruinous, as was evident,
even at this distance, by the broken, rugged, and irregular outline of
the walls and of the towers. In others it seemed more entire, and a
pillar of dark smoke, which ascended from the chimneys of the donjon,
and spread its long dusky pennon through the clear ether, indicated
that it was inhabited. But no corn-fields or enclosed pasture-grounds
on the side of the lake showed that provident attention to comfort and
subsistence which usually appeared near the houses of the greater, and
even of the lesser barons. There were no cottages with their patches
of infield, and their crofts and gardens, surrounded by rows of
massive sycamores; no church with its simple tower in the valley; no
herds of sheep among the hills; no cattle on the lower ground; nothing
which intimated the occasional prosecution of the arts of peace and of
industry. It was plain that the inhabitants, whether few or numerous,
must be considered as the garrison of the castle, living within its
defended precincts, and subsisting by means which were other than
peaceful.

Probably it was with this conviction that the old man, gazing on the
castle, muttered to himself, "_Lapis offensionis et petra
scandali!_" and then, turning to Halbert Glendinning, he added, "We
may say of yonder fort as King James did of another fastness in this
province, that he who built it was a thief in his heart." [Footnote:
It was of Lochwood, the hereditary fortress of the Johnstones of
Aunandale, a strong castle situated in the centre of a quaking bog,
that James VI. made this remark.]

"But it was not so," answered Glendinning; "yonder castle was built by
the old lords of Avenel, men as much beloved in peace as they were
respected in war. They were the bulwark of the frontiers against
foreigners, and the protectors of the natives from domestic
oppression. The present usurper of their inheritance no more resembles
them, than the night-prowling owl resembles a falcon, because she
builds on the same rock."

"This Julian Avenel, then, holds no high place in the love and regard of
his neighbours?" said Warden.

"So little," answered Halbert, "that besides the jack-men and riders
with whom he has associated himself, and of whom he has many at his
disposal, I know of few who voluntarily associate with him. He has
been more than once outlawed both by England and Scotland, his lands
declared forfeited, and his head set at a price. But in these unquiet
times, a man so daring as Julian Avenel has ever found some friends
willing to protect him against the penalties of the law, on condition
of his secret services."

"You describe a dangerous man," replied Warden.

"You may have experience of that," replied the youth, "if you deal not
the more warily;--though it may be that he also has forsaken the
community of the church, and gone astray in the path of heresy."

"What your blindness terms the path of heresy," answered the reformer,
"is indeed the straight and narrow way, wherein he who walks turns not
aside, whether for worldly wealth or for worldly passions. Would to
God this man were moved by no other and no worse spirit than that
which prompts my poor endeavours to extend the kingdom of Heaven! This
Baron of Avenel is personally unknown to me, is not of our
congregation or of our counsel; yet I bear to him charges touching my
safety, from those whom he must fear if he does not respect them, and
upon that assurance I will venture upon his hold--I am now
sufficiently refreshed by these few minutes of repose."

"Take then this advice for your safety," said Halbert, "and believe
that it is founded upon the usage of this country and its inhabitants.
If you can better shift for yourself, go not to the Castle of
Avenel--if you do risk going thither, obtain from him, if possible,
his safe conduct, and beware that he swears it by the Black Rood--And
lastly, observe whether he eats with you at the board, or pledges you
in the cup; for if he gives you not these signs of welcome, his
thoughts are evil towards you."

"Alas!" said the preacher, "I have no better earthly refuge for the
present than these frowning towers, but I go thither trusting to aid
which is not of this earth--But thou, good youth, needest thou trust
thyself in this dangerous den?"

"I," answered Halbert, "am in no danger. I am well known to Christie
of the Clinthill, the henchman of this Julian Avenel; and, what is a
yet better protection, I have nothing either to provoke malice or to
tempt plunder."

The tramp of a steed, which clattered along the shingly banks of the
loch, was now heard behind them; and, when they looked back, a rider
was visible, his steel cap and the point of his long lance glancing in
the setting sun, as he rode rapidly towards them.

Halbert Glendinning soon recognized Christie of the Clinthill, and made
his companion aware that the henchman of Julian Avenel was approaching.

"Ha, youngling!" said Christie to Halbert, as he came up to them,
"thou hast made good my word at last, and come to take service with my
noble master, hast thou not? Thou shalt find a good friend and a true;
and ere Saint Barnaby come round again, thou shalt know every pass
betwixt Millburn Plain and Netherby, as if thou hadst been born with a
jack on thy back, and a lance in thy hand.--What old carle hast thou
with thee?--He is not of the brotherhood of Saint Mary's--at least he
has not the buist [Footnote: _Buist_--The brand, or mark, set
upon sheep or cattle, by their owners.] of these black cattle."

"He is a wayfaring man," said Halbert, "who has concerns with Julian
of Avenel. For myself, I intend to go to Edinburgh to see the court
and the Queen, and when I return hither we will talk of your proffer.
Meantime, as thou hast often invited me to the castle, I crave
hospitality there to-night for myself and my companion."

"For thyself and welcome, young comrade," replied Christie; "but we
harbour no pilgrims, nor aught that looks like a pilgrim."

"So please you," said Warden, "I have letters of commendation to thy
master from a sure friend, whom he will right willingly oblige in higher
matters than in affording me a brief protection.--And I am no pilgrim,
but renounce the same, with all its superstitious observances."
He offered his letters to the horseman, who shook his head.

"These," he said, "are matters for my master, and it will be well if he
can read them himself; for me, sword and lance are my book and psalter,
and have been since I was twelve years old. But I will guide you to the
castle, and the Baron of Avenel will himself judge of your errand."

By this time the party had reached the causeway, along which Christie
advanced at a trot, intimating his presence to the warders within the
castle by a shrill and peculiar whistle. At this signal the farther
drawbridge was lowered. The horseman passed it, and disappeared under
the gloomy portal which was beyond it.

Glendinning and his companion advancing more leisurely along the
rugged causeway, stood at length under the same gateway, over which
frowned, in dark red freestone, the ancient armorial bearings of the
house of Avenel, which represented a female figure shrouded and
muffled, which occupied the whole field. The cause of their assuming
so singular a device was uncertain, but the figure was generally
supposed to represent the mysterious being called the White Lady of
Avenel. [Footnote: There is an ancient English family, I believe,
which bears, or did bear, a ghost or spirit passant sable in a field
argent. This seems to have been a device of a punning or
_canting_ herald.] The sight of this mouldering shield awakened
in the mind of Halbert the strange circumstances which had connected
his fate with that of Mary Avenel, and with the doings of the
spiritual being who was attached to her house, and whom he saw here,
represented in stone, as he had before seen her effigy upon the
seal-ring of Walter Avenel, which, with other trinkets formerly
mentioned, had been saved from pillage, and brought to Glendearg, when
Mary's mother was driven from her habitation.

"You sigh, my son," said the old man, observing the impression made on
his youthful companion's countenance, but mistaking the cause; "if you
fear to enter, we may yet return."

"That can ye not," said Christie of the Clinthill, who emerged at that
instant from the side-door under the archway. "Look yonder, and choose
whether you will return skimming the water like a wild-duck, or winging
the air like a plover."

They looked, and saw that the drawbridge which they had just crossed
was again raised, and now interposed its planks betwixt the setting
sun and the portal of the castle, deepening the gloom of the arch
under which they stood. Christie laughed and bid them follow him,
saying, by way of encouragement, in Halbert's ear, "Answer boldly and
readily to whatever the Baron asks you. Never stop to pick your words,
and above all show no fear of him--the devil is not so black as he is
painted."

As he spoke thus, he introduced them into the large stone hall, at the
upper end of which blazed a huge fire of wood. The long oaken table,
which, as usual, occupied the midst of the apartment, was covered with
rude preparations for the evening meal of the Baron and his chief
domestics, five or six of whom, strong, athletic, savage-looking men,
paced up and down the lower end of the hall, which rang to the jarring
clang of their long swords that clashed as they moved, and to the
heavy tramp of their high-heeled jack-boots. Iron jacks, or coats of
buff, formed the principal part of their dress, and steel-bonnets, or
large slouched hats with Spanish plumes drooping backwards, were their
head attire.

The Baron of Avenel was one of those tall, muscular, martial figures,
which are the favourite subjects of Salvator Rosa. He wore a cloak
which had been once gaily trimmed, but which, by long wear and
frequent exposure to the weather, was now faded in its colours. Thrown
negligently about his tall person, it partly hid, and partly showed, a
short doublet of buff, under which was in some places visible that
light shirt of mail which was called a _secret_, because worn
instead of more ostensible armour to protect against private
assassination. A leathern belt sustained a large and heavy sword on
one side, and on the other that gay poniard which had once called Sir
Piercie Shafton master, of which the hatchments and gildings were
already much defaced, either by rough usage or neglect.

Notwithstanding the rudeness of his apparel, Julian Avenel's manner
and countenance had far more elevation than those of the attendants
who surrounded him. He might be fifty or upwards, for his dark hair
was mingled with gray, but age had neither tamed the fire of his eye
nor the enterprise of his disposition. His countenance had been
handsome, for beauty was an attribute of the family; but the lines
were roughened by fatigue and exposure to the weather, and rendered
coarse by the habitual indulgence of violent passions.

He seemed in deep and moody reflection, and was pacing at a distance
from his dependents along the upper end of the hall, sometimes
stopping from time to time to caress and feed a gos-hawk, which sat
upon his wrist, with its jesses (_i. e._ the leathern straps
fixed to its legs) wrapt around his hand. The bird, which seemed not
insensible to its master's attention, answered his caresses by
ruffling forward its feathers, and pecking playfully at his finger. At
such intervals the Baron smiled, but instantly resumed the darksome
air of sullen meditation. He did not even deign to look upon an
object, which few could have passed and repassed so often without
bestowing on it a transient glance.

This was a woman of exceeding beauty, rather gaily than richly
attired, who sat on a low seat close by the huge hall chimney. The
gold chains round her neck and arms,--the gay gown of green which
swept the floor,--the silver embroidered girdle, with its bunch of
keys, depending in house-wifely pride by a silver chain,--the yellow
silken _couvrechef_ (Scottice, _curch_) which was disposed
around her head, and partly concealed her dark profusion of
hair,--above all, the circumstance so delicately touched in the old
ballad, that "the girdle was too short," the "gown of green all too
strait," for the wearer's present shape, would have intimated the
Baron's lady.  But then the lowly seat,--the expression of deep
melancholy, which was changed into a timid smile whenever she saw the
least chance of catching the eye of Julian Avenel,--the subdued look
of grief, and the starting tear for which that constrained smile was
again exchanged when she saw herself entirely disregarded,--these were
not the attributes of a wife, or they were those of a dejected and
afflicted female, who had yielded her love on less than legitimate
terms.

Julian Avenel, as we have said, continued to pace the hall without
paying any of that mute attention which is rendered to almost every
female either by affection or courtesy. He seemed totally unconscious
of her presence, or of that of his attendants, and was only roused
from his own dark reflections by the notice he paid to the falcon, to
which, however, the lady seemed to attend, as if studying to find
either an opportunity of speaking to the Baron, or of finding
something enigmatical in the expressions which he used to the bird.
All this the strangers had time enough to remark; for no sooner had
they entered the apartment than their usher, Christie of the
Clinthill, after exchanging a significant glance with the menials or
troopers at the lower end of the apartment, signed to Halbert
Glendinning and to his companion to stand still near the door, while
he himself, advancing nearer the table, placed himself in such a
situation as to catch the Baron's observation when he should be
disposed to look around, but without presuming to intrude himself on
his master's notice. Indeed, the look of this man, naturally bold,
hardy, and audacious, seemed totally changed when he was in presence
of his master, and resembled the dejected and cowering manner of a
quarrelsome dog when rebuked by his owner, or when he finds himself
obliged to deprecate the violence of a superior adversary of his own
species.

In spite of the novelty of his own situation, and every painful
feeling connected with it, Halbert felt his curiosity interested in
the female, who sate by the chimney unnoticed and unregarded. He
marked with what keen and trembling solicitude she watched the broken
words of Julian, and how her glance stole towards him, ready to be
averted upon the slightest chance of his perceiving himself to be
watched.

Meantime he went on with his dalliance with his feathered favourite,
now giving, now withholding, the morsel with which he was about to
feed the bird, and so exciting its appetite and gratifying it by
turns. "What! more yet?--thou foul kite, thou wouldst never have
done--give thee part thou wilt have all--Ay, prune thy feathers, and
prink thyself gay--much thou wilt make of it now--dost think I know
thee not?--dost think I see not that all that ruffling and pluming of
wing and feathers is not for thy master, but to try what thou canst
make of him, thou greedy gled?--well--there--take it then, and rejoice
thyself--little boon goes far with thee, and with all thy sex--and so
it should."

He ceased to look on the bird, and again traversed the apartment. Then
taking another small piece of raw meat from the trencher, on which it
was placed ready cut for his use, he began once again to tempt and
tease the bird, by offering and withdrawing it, until he awakened its
wild and bold disposition. "What! struggling, fluttering, aiming at me
with beak and single? [Footnote: In the _kindly_ language of
hawking, as Lady Juliana Berners terms it, hawks' talons are called
their _singles_] So la! So la! wouldst mount? wouldst fly? the
jesses are round thy clutches, fool--thou canst neither stir nor soar
but by my will--Beware thou come to reclaim, wench, else I will wring
thy head off one of these days--Well, have it then, and well fare thou
with it.--So ho, Jenkin!" One of the attendants stepped forward--"
Take the foul gled hence to the mew--or, stay; leave her, but look
well to her casting and to her bathing--we will see her fly
to-morrow.--How now, Christie, so soon returned ?"

Christie advanced to his master, and gave an account of himself and
his journey, in the way in which a police-officer holds communication
with his magistrate, that is, as much by signs as by words.

"Noble sir," said that worthy satellite, "the Laird of--," he named no
place, but pointed with his finger in a south-western direction,--"
may not ride with you the day he purposed, because the Lord Warden has
threatened that he will--"

Here another blank, intelligibly enough made up by the speaker
touching his own neck with his left fore-finger, and leaning his head
a little to one side.

"Cowardly caitiff!" said Julian; "by Heaven! the whole world turns
sheer naught--it is not worth a brave man's living in--ye may ride a
day and night, and never see a feather wave or hear a horse
prance--the spirit of our fathers is dead amongst us--the very brutes
are degenerated--the cattle we bring at our life's risk are mere
carrion--our hawks are riflers [Footnote: So called when they only
caught their prey by the feathers.]--our hounds are turnspits and
trindle-tails--our men are women--and our women are--"

He looked at the female for the first time, and stopped short in the
midst of what he was about to say, though there was something so
contemptuous in the glance, that the blank might have been thus filled
up--"Our women are such as she is."

He said it not, however, and as if desirous of attracting his
attention at all risks, and in whatever manner, she rose and came
forward to him, but with a timorousness ill-disguised by affected
gaiety.--"Our women, Julian--what would you say of the women?"

"Nothing," answered Julian Avenel, "at least nothing but that they are
kind-hearted wenches like thyself, Kate." The female coloured deeply,
and returned to her seat.--"And what strangers hast thou brought with
thee, Christie, that stand yonder like two stone statues?" said the
Baron.

"The taller," answered Christie, "is, so please you, a young fellow
called Halbert Glendinning, the eldest son of the old widow at
Glendearg."

"What brings him here?" said the Baron; "hath he any message from
Mary Avenel?"

"Not as I think," said Christie; "the youth is roving the country--he
was always a wild slip, for I have known him since he was the height of
my sword."

"What qualities hath he?" said the Baron.

"All manner of qualities," answered his follower--"he can strike a
buck, track a deer, fly a hawk, halloo to a hound--he shoots in the
long and crossbow to a hair's breadth--wields a lance or sword like
myself nearly--backs a horse manfully and fairly--I wot not what more
a man need to do to make him a gallant companion."

"And who," said the Baron, "is the old miser [Footnote: Miser, used in
the sense in which it often occurs in Spenser, and which is indeed its
literal import--"wretched old man."] who stands beside him?"

"Some cast of a priest as I fancy--he says he is charged with letters to
you."

"Bid them come forward," said the Baron; and no sooner had they
approached him more nearly, than, struck by the fine form and strength
displayed by Halbert Glendinning, he addressed him thus: "I am told,
young Swankie, that you are roaming the world to seek your fortune,--if
you will serve Julian Avenel, you may find it without going farther."

"So please you," answered Glendinning, "something has chanced to me
that makes it better I should leave this land, and I am bound for
Edinburgh."

"What!--thou hast stricken some of the king's deer, I warrant,--or
lightened the meadows of Saint Mary's of some of their beeves--or thou
hast taken a moonlight leap over the border?"

"No, sir," said Halbert, "my case is entirely different."

"Then I warrant thee," said the Baron, "thou hast stabbed some brother
churl in a fray about a wench--thou art a likely lad to wrangle in
such a cause."

Ineffably disgusted at his tone and manner, Halbert Glendinning
remained silent, while the thought darted across his mind, what would
Julian Avenel have said, had he known the quarrel of which he spoke so
lightly, had arisen on account of his own brother's daughter! "But be
thy cause of flight what it will," said Julian, in continuation, "dost
thou think the law or its emissaries can follow thee into this island,
or arrest thee under the standard of Avenel?--Look at the depth of the
lake, the strength of the walls, the length of the causeway--look at
my men, and think if they are likely to see a comrade injured, or if
I, their master, am a man to desert a faithful follower, in good or
evil. I tell thee it shall be an eternal day of truce betwixt thee and
justice, as they call it, from the instant thou hast put my colours
into thy cap--thou shalt ride by the Warden's nose as thou wouldst
pass an old market-woman, and ne'er a cur which follows him shall dare
to bay at thee!"

"I thank you for your offers, noble sir," replied Halbert, "but I must
answer in brief, that I cannot profit by them--my fortunes lead me
elsewhere."

"Thou art a self-willed fool for thy pains," said Julian, turning from
him; and signing Christie to approach, he whispered in his ear, "there
is promise in that young fellow's looks, Christie, and we want men of
limbs and sinews so compacted--those thou hast brought to me of late
are the mere refuse of mankind, wretches scarce worth the arrow that
ends them: this youngster is limbed like Saint George. Ply him with
wine and wassail--let the wenches weave their meshes about him like
spiders--thou understandest?" Christie gave a sagacious nod of
intelligence, and fell back to a respectful distance from his
master.--"And thou, old man," said the Baron, turning to the elder
traveller, "hast thou been roaming the world after fortune too?--it
seems not she has fallen into thy way."

"So please you," replied Warden, "I were perhaps more to be pitied than
I am now, had I indeed met with that fortune, which, like others, I have
sought in my greener days."

"Nay, understand me, friend," said the Baron; "if thou art satisfied
with thy buckram gown and long staff, I also am well content thou
shouldst be as poor and contemptible as is good for the health of thy
body and soul--All I care to know of thee is, the cause which hath
brought thee to my castle, where few crows of thy kind care to settle.
Thou art, I warrant thee, some ejected monk of a suppressed convent,
paying in his old days the price of the luxurious idleness in which he
spent his youth.--Ay, or it may be some pilgrim with a budget of lies
from Saint James of Compostella, or Our Lady of Loretto; or thou
mayest be some pardoner with his budget of relics from Rome, forgiving
sins at a penny a-dozen, and one to the tale.--Ay, I guess why I find
thee in this boy's company, and doubtless thou wouldst have such a
strapping lad as he to carry thy wallet, and relieve thy lazy
shoulders; but by the mass I will cross thy cunning. I make my vow to
sun and moon, I will not see a proper lad so misleard as to run the
country with an old knave like Simmie and his brother. [Footnote: Two
_quaestionarii_, or begging friars, whose accoutrements and
roguery make the subject of an old Scottish satirical poem] Away with
thee!" he added, rising in wrath, and speaking so fast as to give no
opportunity of answer, being probably determined to terrify the elder
guest into an abrupt flight--"Away with thee, with thy clouted coat,
scrip, and scallop-shell, or, by the name of Avenel, I will have them
loose the hounds on thee."

Warden waited with the greatest patience until Julian Avenel, astonished
that the threats and violence of his language made no impression on him,
paused in a sort of wonder, and said in a less imperious tone, "Why the
fiend dost thou not answer me?"

"When you have done speaking," said Warden, in the same composed
manner, "it will be full time to reply."

"Say on man, in the devil's name--but take heed--beg not here--were it
but for the rinds of cheese, the refuse of the rats, or a morsel that
my dogs would turn from--neither a grain of meal, nor the nineteenth
part of a gray groat, will I give to any feigned limmer of thy coat,"

"It may be," answered Warden, "that you would have less quarrel with
my coat if you knew what it covers, I am neither a friar nor
mendicant, and would be right glad to hear thy testimony against these
foul deceivers of God's church, and usurpers of his rights over the
Christian flock, were it given in Christian charity."

"And who or what art thou, then," said Avenel, "that thou comest to this
Border land, and art neither monk, nor soldier, nor broken man?"

"I am an humble teacher of the holy word," answered Warden. "This
letter from a most noble person will speak why I am here at this present
time."

He delivered the letter to the Baron, who regarded the seal with some
surprise, and then looked on the letter itself, which seemed to excite
still more. He then fixed his eyes on the stranger, and said, in a
menacing tone, "I think thou darest not betray me or deceive me?"

"I am not the man to attempt either," was the concise reply.

Julian Avenel carried the letter to the window, where he perused, or
at least attempted to peruse it more than once, often looking from the
paper and gazing on the stranger who had delivered it, as if he meant
to read the purport of the missive in the face of the messenger.
Julian at length called to the female,--"Catherine, bestir thee, and
fetch me presently that letter which I bade thee keep ready at hand in
thy casket, having no sure lockfast place of my own."

Catherine went with the readiness of one willing to be employed; and
as she walked, the situation which requires a wider gown and a longer
girdle, and in which woman claims from man a double portion of the
most anxious care, was still more visible than before. She soon
returned with the paper, and was rewarded with a cold--"I thank thee,
wench; thou art a careful secretary."

This second paper he also perused and reperused more than once, and
still, as he read it, bent from time to time a wary and observant eye
upon Henry Warden. This examination and re-examination, though both
the man and the place were dangerous, the preacher endured with the
most composed and steady countenance, seeming, under the eagle, or
rather the vulture eye of the baron, as unmoved as under the gaze of
an ordinary and peaceful peasant. At length Julian Avenel folded both
papers, and having put them into the pocket of his cloak, cleared his
brow, and, coming forward, addressed his female companion.
"Catherine," said he, "I have done this good man injustice, when I
mistook him for one of the drones of Rome.  He is a preacher,
Catherine--a preacher of the--the new doctrine of the Lords of the
Congregation."

"The doctrine of the blessed Scriptures," said the preacher, "purified
from the devices of men."

"Sayest thou?" said Julian Avenel--"Well, thou mayest call it what
thou lists; but to me it is recommended, because it flings off all
those sottish dreams about saints and angels and devils, and unhorses
lazy monks that have ridden us so long, and spur-galled us so hard. No
more masses and corpse-gifts--no more tithes and offerings to make men
poor--no more prayers or psalms to make men cowards-no more
christenings and penances, and confessions and marriages."

"So please you," said Henry Warden, "it is against the corruptions,
not against the fundamental doctrines, of the church, which we desire
to renovate, and not to abolish."

"Prithee, peace, man," said the Baron; "we of the laity care not what
you set up, so you pull merrily down what stands in our way. Specially
it suits well with us of the Southland fells; for it is our profession
to turn the world upside down, and we live ever the blithest life when
the downer side is uppermost."

Warden would have replied; but the Baron allowed him not time,
striking the table with the hilt of his dagger, and crying out,--"Ha!
you loitering knaves, bring our supper-meal quickly. See you not this
holy man is exhausted for lack of food? heard ye ever of priest or
preacher that devoured not his five meals a-day?"

The attendants bustled to and fro, and speedily brought in several
large smoking platters filled with huge pieces of beef, boiled and
roasted, but without any variety whatsoever; without vegetables, and
almost without bread, though there was at the upper end a few
oat-cakes in a basket. Julian Avenel made a sort of apology to Warden.

"You have been commended to our care, Sir Preacher, since that is your
style, by a person whom we highly honour."

"I am assured," said Warden, "that the most noble Lord--"

"Prithee, peace, man," said Avenel; "what need of naming names, so we
understand each other? I meant but to speak in reference to your
safety and comfort, of which he desires us to be chary. Now, for your
safety, look at my walls and water. But touching your comfort, we have
no corn of our own, and the meal-girnels of the south are less easily
transported than their beeves, seeing they have no legs to walk upon.
But what though? a stoup of wine thou shalt have, and of the
best--thou shalt sit betwixt Catherine and me at the board-end.--And,
Christie, do thou look to the young springald, and call to the
cellarer for a flagon of the best."

The Baron took his wonted place at the upper end of the board; his
Catherine sate down, and courteously pointed to a seat betwixt them for
their reverend guest. But notwithstanding the influence both of hunger
and fatigue, Henry Warden retained his standing posture.




Chapter the Twenty-Fifth.


  When lovely woman stoops to folly,
  And finds too late that men betray--

Julian Avenel saw with surprise the demeanour of the reverend
stranger. "Beshrew me," he said, "these new-fashioned religioners have
fast-days, I warrant me--the old ones used to confer these blessings
chiefly on the laity."

"We acknowledge no such rule," said the preacher--"We hold that our
faith consists not in using or abstaining from special meats on special
days; and in fasting we rend our hearts, and not our garments."

"The better--the better for yourselves, and the worse for Tom Tailor,"
said the Baron; "but come, sit down, or, if thou needs must e'en give
us a cast of thy office, mutter thy charm."

"Sir Baron," said the preacher, "I am in a strange land, where neither
mine office nor my doctrine are known, and where, it would seem, both
are greatly misunderstood. It is my duty so to bear me, that in my
person, however unworthy, my Master's dignity may be respected, and
that sin may take not confidence from relaxation of the bonds of
discipline."

"Ho la! halt there," said the Baron; "thou wert sent hither for thy
safety, but not, I think, to preach to me, or control me. What is it
thou wouldst have, Sir Preacher? Remember thou speakest to one
somewhat short of patience, who loves a short health and a long
draught."

"In a word, then," said Henry Warden, "that lady--"

"How?" said the Baron, starting--"what of her?--what hast thou to
say of that dame?"

"Is she thy house-dame?" said the preacher, after a moment's pause, in
which, he seemed to seek for the best mode of expressing what he had
to say--"Is she, in brief, thy wife?"

The unfortunate young woman pressed both her hands on her face, as if
to hide it, but the deep blush which crimsoned her brow and neck,
showed that her cheeks were also glowing; and the bursting tears,
which found their way betwixt her slender fingers, bore witness to her
sorrow, as well as to her shame.

"Now, by my father's ashes!" said the Baron, rising and spurning from
him his footstool with such violence, that it hit the wall on the
opposite side of the apartment--then instantly constraining himself,
he muttered, "What need to run myself into trouble for a fool's
word?"--then resuming his seat, he answered coldly and
scornfully--"No, Sir Priest or Sir Preacher, Catherine is not my
wife--Cease thy whimpering, thou foolish wench--she is not my wife,
but she is handfasted with me, and that makes her as honest a woman."

"Handfasted?"--repeated Warden.

"Knowest thou not that rite, holy man?" said Avenel, in the same tone
of derision; "then I will tell thee. We Border-men are more wary than
your inland clowns of Fife and Lothian--no jump in the dark for us--no
clenching the fetters around our wrists till we know how they will
wear with us--we take our wives, like our horses, upon trial. When we
are handfasted, as we term it, we are man and wife for a year and
day--that space gone by, each may choose another mate, or, at their
pleasure, may call the priest to marry them for life--and this we call
handfasting." [Footnote: This custom of handfasting actually prevailed
in the upland days. It arose partly from the want of priests. While
the convents subsisted, monks were detached on regular circuits
through the wilder districts, to marry those who had lived in this
species of connexion. A practice of the same kind existed in the Isle
of Portland.]

"Then," said the preacher, "I tell thee, noble Baron, in brotherly
love to thy soul, it is a custom licentious, gross, and corrupted,
and, if persisted in, dangerous, yea, damnable. It binds thee to the
frailer being while she is the object of desire--it relieves thee when
she is most the subject of pity--it gives all to brutal sense, and
nothing to generous and gentle affection.  I say to thee, that he who
can meditate the breach of such an engagement, abandoning the deluded
woman and the helpless offspring, is worse than the birds of prey; for
of them the males remain with their mates until the nestlings can take
wing. Above all, I say it is contrary to the pure Christian doctrine,
which assigns woman to man as the partner of his labour, the soother
of his evil, his helpmate in peril, his friend in affliction; not as
the toy of his looser hours, or as a flower, which, once cropped, he
may throw aside at pleasure."

"Now, by the Saints, a most virtuous homily!" said the Baron;
"quaintly conceived and curiously pronounced, and to a well-chosen
congregation.  Hark ye, Sir Gospeller! trow ye to have a fool in hand?
Know I not that your sect rose by bluff Harry Tudor, merely because ye
aided him to change _his_ Kate; and wherefore should I not use
the same Christian liberty with _mine?_ Tush, man! bless the good
food, and meddle not with what concerns thee not--thou hast no gull in
Julian Avenel."

"He hath gulled and cheated himself," said the preacher, "should he
even incline to do that poor sharer of his domestic cares the
imperfect justice that remains to him. Can he now raise her to the
rank of a pure and uncontaminated matron?--Can he deprive his child of
the misery of owing birth to a mother who has erred? He can indeed
give them both the rank, the state of married wife and of lawful son;
but, in public opinion, their names will be smirched and sullied with
a stain which his tardy efforts cannot entirely efface. Yet render it
to them, Baron of Avenel, render to them this late and imperfect
justice. Bid me bind you together for ever, and celebrate the day of
your bridal, not with feasting or wassail, but with sorrow for past
sin, and the resolution to commence a better life.  Happy then will
have the chance been that has drawn me to this castle, though I come
driven by calamity, and unknowing where my course is bound, like a
leaf travelling on the north wind."

The plain, and even coarse features, of the zealous speaker, were
warmed at once and ennobled by the dignity of his enthusiasm; and the
wild Baron, lawless as he was, and accustomed to spurn at the control
whether of religious or moral law, felt, for the first time perhaps in
his life, that he was under subjection to a mind superior to his own.
He sat mute and suspended in his deliberations, hesitating betwixt
anger and shame, yet borne down by the weight of the just rebuke thus
boldly fulminated against him.

The unfortunate young woman, conceiving hopes from her tyrant's
silence and apparent indecision, forgot both her fear and shame in her
timid expectation that Avenel would relent; and fixing upon him her
anxious and beseeching eyes, gradually drew near and nearer to his
seat, till at length, laying a trembling hand on his cloak, she
ventured to utter, "O noble Julian, listen to the good man!"

The speech and the motion were ill-timed, and wrought on that proud and
wayward spirit the reverse of her wishes.

The fierce Baron started up in a fury, exclaiming, "What! thou foolish
callet, art thou confederate with this strolling vagabond, whom thou
hast seen beard me in my own hall! Hence with thee, and think that I
ana proof both to male and female hypocrisy!"

The poor girl started back, astounded at his voice of thunder and
looks of fury, and, turning pale as death, endeavoured to obey his
orders, and tottered towards the door. Her limbs failed in the
attempt, and she fell on the stone floor in a manner which her
situation might have rendered fatal--The blood gushed from her
face.--Halbert Glendinning brooked not a sight so brutal, but,
uttering a deep imprecation, started from his seat, and laid his hand
on his sword, under the strong impulse of passing it through the body
of the cruel and hard-hearted ruffian. But Christie of the Clinthill,
guessing his intention, threw his arms around him, and prevented him
from stirring to execute his purpose.

The impulse to such an act of violence was indeed but momentary, as it
instantly appeared that Avenel himself, shocked at the effects of his
violence, was lifting up and endeavouring to soothe in his own way the
terrified Catherine.

"Peace," he said, "prithee, peace, thou silly minion--why, Kate,
though I listen not to this tramping preacher, I said not what might
happen an thou dost bear me a stout boy. There--there--dry thy
tears--Call thy women.--So ho!--where be these queans?--Christie--
Rowley--Hutcheon--drag them hither by the hair of the head!"

A half dozen of startled wild-looking females rushed into the room,
and bore out her who might be either termed their mistress or their
companion.  She showed little sign of life, except by groaning faintly
and keeping her hand on her side.

No sooner had this luckless female been conveyed from the apartment,
than the Baron, advancing to the table, filled and drank a deep goblet
of wine; then, putting an obvious restraint on his passions, turned to
the preacher, who stood horror-struck at the scene he had witnessed,
and said, "You have borne too hard on us, Sir Preacher--but coming
with the commendations which you have brought me, I doubt not but your
meaning was good. But we are a wilder folk than you inland men of Fife
and Lothian.  Be advised, therefore, by me--Spur not an unbroken
horse--put not your ploughshare too deep into new land--Preach to us
spiritual liberty, and we will hearken to you.--But we will give no
way to spiritual bondage.--Sit, therefore, down, and pledge me in old
sack, and we will talk over these matters."

"It is _from_ spiritual bondage," said the preacher, in the same
tone of admonitory reproof, "that I came to deliver you--it is from a
bondage more fearful than than that of the heaviest earthly gyves--it
is from your own evil passions."

"Sit down," said Avenel, fiercely; "sit down while the play is good--
else by my father's crest and my mother's honour!----"

"Now," whispered Christie of the Clinthill to Halbert, "if he refuse to
sit down, I would not give a gray groat for his head."

"Lord Baron," said Warden, "thou hast placed me in extremity. But if
the question be, whether I am to hide the light which I am commanded
to show forth, or to lose the light of this world, my choice is made.
I say to thee, like the Holy Baptist to Herod, it is not lawful for
thee to have this woman; and I say it though bonds and death be the
consequence, counting my life as nothing in comparison of the ministry
to which I am called."

Julian Avenel, enraged at the firmness of this reply, flung from his
right hand the cup in which he was about to drink to his guest, and
from the other cast off the hawk, which flew wildly through the
apartment. His first motion was to lay hand upon his dagger. But,
changing his resolution, he exclaimed, "To the dungeon with this
insolent stroller!--I will hear no man speak a word for him----Look to
the falcon, Christie, thou fool--an she escape, I will despatch you
after her every man--Away with that hypocritical dreamer--drag him
hence if he resist!"

He was obeyed in both points. Christie of the Clinthill arrested the
hawk's flight, by putting his foot on her jesses, and so holding her
fast, while Henry Warden was led off, without having shown the
slightest symptoms of terror, by two of the Baron's satellites. Julian
Avenel walked the apartment for a short time in sullen silence, and
despatching one of his attendants with a whispered message, which
probably related to the health of the unfortunate Catherine, he said
aloud, "These rash and meddling priests--By Heaven! they make us worse
than we would be without them."

[Footnote: If it were necessary to name a prototype for this brutal,
licentious and cruel Border chief, in an age which showed but too many
such, the Laird of Black Ormiston might be selected for that purpose.
He was a friend and confidant of Bothwell, and an agent in Henry
Darnley's murder. At his last stage, he was, like other great
offenders, a seeming penitent; and, as his confession bears, divers
gentlemen and servants being in the chamber, he said, "For God's sake,
sit down and pray for me, for I have been a great sinner otherwise,"
(that is, besides his share in Darnley's death,) "for the which God is
this day punishing me; for of all men on the earth, I have been one of
the proudest, and most high-minded, and most unclean of my body.  But
specially I have shed the innocent blood of one Michael Hunter with my
own hands. Alas, therefore! because the said Michael, having me lying
on my back, having a fork in his hand, might have slain me if he had
pleased, and did it not, which of all things grieves me most in
conscience. Also, in a rage, I hanged a poor man for a horse;--with
many other wicked deeds, for whilk I ask my God mercy. It is not
marvel I have been wicked, considering the wicked company that ever I
have been in, but specially within the seven years by-past, in which I
never saw two good men or one good deed, but all kind of wickedness,
and yet God would not suffer me to be lost."--See the whole confession
in the State Trials.

Another worthy of the Borders, called Geordy Bourne, of somewhat
subordinate rank, was a similar picture of profligacy. He had fallen
into the hands of Sir Robert Carey, then Warden of the English East
Marches, who gives the following account of his prisoner's
confession:--

"When all things were quiet, and the watch set at night, after supper,
about ten of the clock, I took one of my men's liveries, and put it
about me, and took two other of my servants with me in their liveries;
and we three, as the Warden's men, came to the Provost Marshal's where
Bourne was, and were let into his chamber. We sate down by him, and
told him that we were desirous to see him, because we heard he was
stout and valiant, and true to his friend, and that we were sorry our
master could not be moved to save his life. He voluntarily of himself
said, that he had lived long enough to do so many villanies as he had
done; and withal told us, that he had lain with above forty men's
wives, what in England what in Scotland; and that he had killed seven
Englishmen with his own hands, cruelly murdering them; and that he had
spent his whole time in whoring, drinking, stealing, and taking deep
revenge for slight offences. He seemed to be very penitent, and much
desired a minister for the comfort of his soul. We promised him to let
our master know his desire, who, we knew would promptly grant it. We
took leave of him; and presently I took order that Mr Selby, a very
honest preacher, should go to him, and not stir from him till his
execution the next morning; for after I had heard his own confession,
I was resolved no conditions should save his life, and so took order,
that at the gates opening the next morning, he should be carried to
execution, which accordingly was performed."--_Memoirs of Sir
Robert Carey, Earl of Monmouth._]

The answer which he presently received seemed somewhat to pacify his
angry mood, and he took his place at the board, commanding his retinue
to the like. All sat down in silence, and began the repast.

During the meal Christie in vain attempted to engage his youthful
companion in carousal, or, at least, in conversation. Halbert
Glendinning pleaded fatigue, and expressed himself unwilling to take
any liquor stronger than the heather ale, which was at that time
frequently used at meals.  Thus every effort at jovialty died away,
until the Baron, striking his hand against the table, as if impatient
of the long unbroken silence, cried out aloud, "What, ho! my
masters--are ye Border-riders, and sit as mute over your meal as a
mess of monks and friars?--Some one sing, if no one list to speak.
Much eaten without either mirth or music is ill of digestion.--Louis,"
he added, speaking to one of the youngest of his followers, "thou art
ready enough to sing when no one bids thee."

The young man looked first at his master, then up to the arched roof
of the hall, then drank off the horn of ale, or wine, which stood
beside him, and with a rough, yet not unmelodious voice, sung the
following ditty to the ancient air of "Blue bonnets over the Border."

                 I.

  March, march, Ettrick and Teviotdale,
    Why the deil dinna ye march forward in order?
  March, march, Eskdale and Liddesdale,
    All the Blue Bonnets are bound for the Border
        Many a banner spread,
        Flutters above your head,
    Many a crest that is famous in story;
        Mount and make ready then,
        Sons of the mountain glen,
    Fight for the Queen and the old Scottish glory!

                 II.

  Come from the hills where the hirsels are grazing,
    Come from the glen of the buck and the roe;
  Come to the crag where the beacon is blazing,
    Come with the buckler, the lance, and the bow.
        Trumpets are sounding,
        War-steeds are bounding,
    Stand to your arms then, and march in good order;
        England shall many a day
        Tell of the bloody fray,
    When the Blue Bonnets came over the Border!

The song, rude as it was, had in it that warlike character which at
any other time would have roused Halbert's spirit; but at present the
charm of minstrelsy had no effect upon him. He made it his request to
Christie to suffer him to retire to rest, a request with which that
worthy person, seeing no chance of making a favourable impression on
his intended proselyte in his present humour, was at length pleased to
comply. But no Sergeant Kite, who ever practised the profession of
recruiting, was more attentive that his object should not escape him,
than was Christie of the Clinthill.  He indeed conducted Halbert
Glendinning to a small apartment overlooking the lake, which was
accommodated with a truckle bed. But before quitting him, Christie
took special care to give a look to the bars which crossed the outside
of the window, and when he left the apartment, he failed not to give
the key a double turn; circumstances which convinced young Glendinning
that there was no intention of suffering him to depart from the Castle
of Avenel at his own time and pleasure. He judged it, however, most
prudent to let these alarming symptoms pass without observation.

No sooner did he find himself in undisturbed solitude, than he ran
rapidly over the events of the day in his recollection, and to his
surprise found that his own precarious fate, and even the death of
Piercie Shafton, made less impression on him than the singularly bold
and determined conduct of his companion, Henry Warden. Providence,
which suits its instruments to the end they are to achieve, had
awakened in the cause of Reformation in Scotland, a body of preachers
of more energy than refinement, bold in spirit, and strong in faith,
contemners of whatever stood betwixt them and their principal object,
and seeking the advancement of the great cause in which they laboured
by the roughest road, provided it were the shortest. The soft breeze
may wave the willow, but it requires the voice of the tempest to
agitate the boughs of the oak; and, accordingly, to milder hearers,
and in a less rude age, their manners would have been ill-adapted, but
they were singularly successful in their mission to the rude people to
whom it was addressed.

Owing to these reasons, Halbert Glendinning, who had resisted and
repelled the arguments of the preacher, was forcibly struck by the
firmness of his demeanour in the dispute with Julian Avenel. It might
be discourteous, and most certainly it was incautious, to choose such
a place and such an audience, for upbraiding with his transgressions a
baron, whom both manners and situation placed in full possession of
independent power. But the conduct of the preacher was uncompromising,
firm, manly, and obviously grounded upon the deepest conviction which
duty and principle could afford; and Glendinning, who had viewed the
conduct of Avenel with the deepest abhorrence, was proportionally
interested in the brave old man, who had ventured life rather than
withhold the censure due to guilt. This pitch of virtue seemed to him
to be in religion what was demanded by chivalry of her votaries in
war; an absolute surrender of all selfish feelings, and a combination
of every energy proper to the human mind, to discharge the task which
duty demanded.

Halbert was at the period when youth was most open to generous
emotions, and knows best how to appreciate them in others, and he
felt, although he hardly knew why, that, whether catholic or heretic,
the safety of this man deeply interested him. Curiosity mingled with
the feeling, and led him to wonder what the nature of those doctrines
could be, which stole their votary so completely from himself, and
devoted him to chains or to death as their sworn champion. He had
indeed been told of saints and martyrs of former days, who had braved
for their religious faith the extremity of death and torture. But
their spirit of enthusiastic devotion had long slept in the ease and
indolent habits of their successors, and their adventures, like those
of knights-errant, were rather read for amusement than for
edification. A new impulse had been necessary to rekindle the energies
of religious zeal, and that impulse was now operating in favour of a
purer religion, with one of whose steadiest votaries the youth had now
met for the first time.

The sense that he himself was a prisoner, under the power of this
savage chieftain, by no means diminished Halbert's interest in the
fate of his fellow sufferer, while he determined at the same time so
far to emulate his fortitude, that neither threats nor suffering
should compel him to enter into the service of such a master. The
possibility of escape next occurred to him, and though with little
hope of effecting it in that way, Glendinning proceeded to examine
more particularly the window of the apartment. The apartment was
situated in the first story of the castle; and was not so far from the
rock, on which it was founded, but that an active and bold man might
with little assistance descend to a shelf of rock which was
immediately below the window, and from thence either leap or drop
himself down into the lake which lay before his eye, clear and blue in
the placid light of a full summer's moon.--"Were I once placed on that
ledge," thought Glendinning, "Julian Avenel and Christie had seen the
last of me." The size of the window favoured such an attempt, but the
stanchions or iron bars seemed to form an insurmountable obstacle.

While Halbert Glendinning gazed from the window with that eagerness of
hope which was prompted by the energy of his character and his
determination not to yield to circumstances, his ear caught some
sounds from below, and listening with more attention, he could
distinguish the voice of the preacher engaged in his solitary
devotions. To open a correspondence with him became immediately his
object, and failing to do so by less marked sounds, he at length
ventured to speak, and was answered from beneath--"Is it thou, my
son?" The voice of the prisoner now sounded more distinctly than when
it was first heard, for Warden had approached the small aperture,
which, serving his prison for a window, opened just betwixt the wall
and the rock, and admitted a scanty portion of light through a wall of
immense thickness. This _soupirait_ being placed exactly under
Halbert's window, the contiguity permitted the prisoners to converse
in a low tone, when Halbert declared his intention to escape, and the
possibility he saw of achieving his purpose, but for the iron
stanchions of the window--"Prove thy strength, my son, in the name of
God" said the preacher.  Halbert obeyed him more in despair than hope,
but to his great astonishment, and somewhat to his terror, the bar
parted asunder near the bottom, and the longer part being easily bent
outwards, and not secured with lead in the upper socket, dropt out
into Halbert's hand. He immediately whispered, but as energetically as
a whisper could be expressed--"By Heaven, the bar has given way in my
hand!"

"Thank Heaven, my son, instead of swearing by it," answered Warden
from his dungeon.

With little effort Halbert Glendinning forced himself through the
opening thus wonderfully effected, and using his leathern sword-belt
as a rope to assist him, let himself safely drop on the shelf of rock
upon which the preacher's window opened. But through this no passage
could be effected, being scarce larger than a loop-hole for musketry,
and apparently constructed for that purpose.

"Are there no means by which I can assist your escape, my father?"
said Halbert.

"There are none, my son," answered the preacher; "but if thou wilt
ensure my safety, that may be in thy power."

"I will labour earnestly for it," said the youth.

"Take then a letter which I will presently write, for I have the means
of light and writing materials in my scrip--Hasten towards Edinburgh,
and on the way thou wilt meet a body of horse marching
southwards--Give this to their leader, and acquaint him of the state
in which thou hast left me. It may hap that thy doing so will
advantage thyself."

In a minute or two the light of a taper gleamed through the shot-hole,
and very shortly after, the preacher, with the assistance of his
staff, pushed a billet to Glendinning through the window.

"God bless thee, my son," said the old man, "and complete the
marvellous work which he has begun."

"Amen!" answered Halbert, with solemnity, and proceeded on his
enterprise.

He hesitated a moment whether he should attempt to descend to the edge
of the water; but the steepness of the rock, and darkness of the
night, rendered the enterprise too dangerous. He clasped his hands
above his head and boldly sprung from the precipice, shooting himself
forward into the air as far as he could for fear of sunken rocks, and
alighted on the lake, head foremost, with such force as sunk him for a
minute below the surface. But strong, long-breathed, and accustomed to
such exercise, Halbert, even though encumbered with his sword, dived
and rose like a seafowl, and swam across the lake in the northern
direction. When he landed and looked back on the castle, he could
observe that the alarm had been given, for lights glanced from window
to window, and he heard the drawbridge lowered, and the tread of
horses' feet upon the causeway. But, little alarmed for the
consequence of a pursuit during the darkness, he wrung the water from
his dress, and, plunging into the moors, directed his course to the
north-east by the assistance of the polar star

       *       *        *       *        *



Chapter the Twenty-Sixth.


  Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
  I think you all have drank of Circe's cup.
  If here you housed him, here he would have been;
  If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
                                  COMEDY OF ERRORS.

The course of our story, leaving for the present Halbert Glendinning
to the guidance of his courage and his fortune, returns to the Tower
of Glendearg, where matters in the meanwhile fell out, with which it
is most fitting that the reader should be acquainted.

The meal was prepared at noontide with all the care which Elspeth and
Tibb, assisted by the various accommodations which had been supplied
from the Monastery, could bestow on it. Their dialogue ran on as usual
in the intervals of their labour, partly as between mistress and
servant, partly as maintained by gossips of nearly equal quality.

"Look to the minced meat, Tibb," said Elspeth; "and turn the broach
even, thou good-for-nothing Simmie,--thy wits are harrying birds'
nests, child.--Weel, Tibb, this is a fasheous job, this Sir Piercie
lying leaguer with us up here, and wha kens for how lang?"

"A fasheous job indeed," answered her faithful attendant, "and little
good did the name ever bring to fair Scotland. Ye may have your hands
fuller of them than they are yet. Mony a sair heart have the Piercies
given to Scots wife and bairns with their pricking on the Borders.
There was Hotspur and many more of that bloody kindred, have sate in
our skirts since Malcolm's time, as Martin says!"

"Martin should keep a well-scrapit tongue in his head," said Elspeth,
"and not slander the kin of any body that quarters at Glendearg;
forby, that Sir Piercie Shafton is much respected with the holy
fathers of the community, and they will make up to us ony fasherie
that we may have with him, either by good word or good deed, I'se
warrant them. He is a considerate lord the Lord Abbot."

"And weel he likes a saft seat to his hinder end," said Tibb; "I have
seen a belted baron sit on a bare bench, and find nae fault. But an ye
are pleased, mistress, I am pleased."

"Now, in good time, here comes Mysie of the Mill.--And where hae ye
been, lass for a's gane wrang without you?" said Elspeth.

"I just gaed a blink up the burn," said Mysie, "for the young lady has
been down on her bed, and is no just that weel--So I gaed a gliff up
the burn."

"To see the young lads come hame frae the sport, I will warrant you,"
said Elspeth. "Ay, ay, Tibb, that's the way the young folk guide us,
Tibbie--leave us to do the wark, and out to the play themsells."

"Ne'er a bit of that, mistress," said the Maid of the Mill, stripping
her round pretty arms, and looking actively and good-humouredly round
for some duty that she could discharge, "but just--I thought ye might
like to ken if they were coming back, just to get the dinner forward."

"And saw ye ought of them then?" demanded Elspeth.

"Not the least tokening," said Mysie, "though I got to the head of a
knowe, and though the English knight's beautiful white feather could
have been seen over all the bushes in the Shaw."

"The knight's white feather!" said Dame Glendinning; "ye are a silly
hempie--my Halbert's high head will be seen farther than his feather,
let it be as white as it like, I trow."

Mysie made no answer, but began to knead dough for wastel-cake with
all despatch, observing that Sir Piercie had partaken of that dainty,
and commended it upon the preceding day. And presently, in order to
place on the fire the _girdle_, or iron plate on which these
cates were to be baked, she displaced a stew-pan in which one of
Tibb's delicacies were submitted to the action of the kitchen fire.
Tibb muttered betwixt her teeth--"And it is the broth for my sick
bairn, that maun make room for the dainty Southron's wastel-bread. It
was a blithe time in Wight Wallace's day, or good King Robert's, when
the pock-puddings gat naething here but hard straiks and bloody
crowns. But we will see how it will a' end."

Elspeth did not think it proper to notice these discontented
expressions of Tibbie, but they sunk into her mind; for she was apt to
consider her as a sort of authority in matters of war and policy, with
which her former experience as bower-woman at Avenel Castle made her
better acquainted than were the peaceful inhabitants of Halidome. She
only spoke, however, to express her surprise that the hunters did not
return.

"An they come not back the sooner," said Tibb, "they will fare the
waur, for the meat will be roasted to a cinder--and there is poor
Simmie that can turn the spit nae langer: the bairn is melting like an
icicle in warm water--Gang awa, bairn, and take a mouthful of the
caller air, and I will turn the broach till ye come back."

"Rin up to the bartizan at the tower-head, callant," said Dame
Glendinning, "the air will be callerer there than ony gate else, and
bring us word if our Halbert and the gentleman are coming down the
glen."

The boy lingered long enough to allow his substitute, Tibb Tacket,
heartily to tire of her own generosity, and of his cricket-stool by
the side of a huge fire. He at length returned with the news that he
had seen nobody.  The matter was not so remarkable as far as Halbert
Glendinning was concerned, for, patient alike of want and of fatigue,
it was no uncommon circumstance for him to remain in the wilds till
curfew time. But nobody had given Sir Piercie Shafton credit for being
so keen a sportsman, and the idea of an Englishman preferring the
chase to his dinner was altogether inconsistent with their
preconceptions of the national character. Amidst wondering and
conjecturing, the usual dinner-hour passed long away; and the inmates
of the tower, taking a hasty meal themselves, adjourned their more
solemn preparations until the hunters' return at night, since it
seemed now certain that their sport had either carried them to a
greater distance, or engaged them for a longer time than had been
expected.

About four hours after noon, arrived, not the expected sportsmen, but
an unlooked for visitant, the Sub-Prior from the Monastery. The scene
of the preceding day had dwelt on the mind of Father Eustace, who was
of that keen and penetrating cast of mind which loves not to leave
unascertained whatever of mysterious is subjected to its inquiry. His
kindness was interested in the family of Glendearg, which he had now
known for a long time; and besides, the community was interested in
the preservation of the peace betwixt Sir Piercie Shafton and his
youthful host, since whatever might draw public attention on the
former, could not fail to be prejudicial to the Monastery, which was
already threatened by the hand of power. He found the family
assembled, all but Mary Avenel, and was informed that Halbert
Glendinning had accompanied the stranger on a day's sport. So far was
well. They had not returned; but when did youth and sport conceive
themselves bound by set hours? and the circumstance excited no alarm
in his mind.

While he was conversing with Edward Glendinning touching his progress
in the studies he had pointed out to him, they were startled by a
shriek from Mary Avenel's apartment, which drew the whole family
thither in headlong haste. They found her in a swoon in the arms of
old Martin, who was bitterly accusing himself of having killed her; so
indeed it seemed, for her pale features and closed eyes argued rather
a dead corpse than a living person.  The whole family were instantly
in tumult. Snatching her from Martin's arms with the eagerness of
affectionate terror, Edward bore her to the casement, that she might
receive the influence of the open air; the Sub-Prior, who, like many
of his profession, had some knowledge of medicine, hastened to
prescribe the readiest remedies which occurred to him, and the
terrified females contended with, and impeded each other, in their
rival efforts to be useful.

"It has been ane of her weary ghaists," said Dame Glendinning.

"It's just a trembling on her spirits, as her blessed mother used to
have," said Tibb.

"It's some ill news has come ower her," said the miller's maiden;
while burnt feathers, cold water, and all the usual means of restoring
suspended animation, were employed alternately, and with little
effect.

At length a new assistant, who had joined the group unobserved, tendered
his aid in the following terms:--"How is this, my most fair Discretion?
What cause hath moved the ruby current of life to rush back to the
citadel of the heart, leaving pale those features in which it should
have delighted to meander for ever?--Let me approach her," he
said,"--with this sovereign essence, distilled by the fair hands of
the divine Urania, and powerful to recall fugitive life, even if it
were trembling on the verge of departure."

Thus speaking, Sir Piercie Shafton knelt down, and most gracefully
presented to the nostrils of Mary Avenel a silver pouncet-box,
exquisitely chased, containing a sponge dipt in the essence which he
recommmended so highly. Yes, gentle reader, it was Sir Piercie Shafton
himself who thus unexpectedly proffered his good offices! his cheeks,
indeed, very pale, and some part of his dress stained with blood, but
not otherwise appearing different from what he was on the preceding
evening. But no sooner had Mary Avenel opened her eyes, and fixed them
on the figure of the officious courtier, than she screamed faintly,
and exclaimed,--"Secure the murderer!"

Those present stood aghast with astonishment, and none more so than the
Euphuist, who found himself so suddenly and so strangely accused by the
patient whom he was endeavouring to succour, and who repelled his
attempts to yield her assistance with all the energy of abhorrence.
"Take him away!" she exclaimed--"take away the murderer!"

"Now, by my knighthood," answered Sir Piercie, "your lovely faculties
either of mind or body are, O my most fair Discretion, obnubilated by
some strange hallucination. For either your eyes do not discern that
it is Piercie Shafton, your most devoted Affability, who now stands
before you, or else, your eyes discerning truly, your mind hath most
erroneously concluded that he hath been guilty of some delict or
violence to which his hand is a stranger. No murder, O most scornful
Discretion, hath been this day done, saving but that which your angry
glances are now performing on your most devoted captive."

He was here interrupted by the Sub-Prior, who had, in the meantime,
been speaking with Martin apart, and had received from him an account
of the circumstances, which, suddenly communicated to Mary Avenel, had
thrown her into this state. "Sir Knight," said the Sub-Prior, in a
very solemn tone, yet with some hesitation, "circumstances have been
communicated to us of a nature so extraordinary, that, reluctant as I
am to exercise such authority over a guest of our venerable community,
I am constrained to request from you an explanation of them. You left
this tower early in the morning, accompanied by a youth, Halbert
Glendinning, the eldest son of this good dame, and you return hither
without him. Where, and at what hour, did you part company from him?"

The English knight paused for a moment, and then replied,--"I marvel
that your reverence employs so grave a tone to enforce so light a
question.  I parted with the villagio whom you call Halbert
Glendinning some hour or twain after sunrise."

"And at what place, I pray you?" said the monk.

"In a deep ravine, where a fountain rises at the base of a huge rock; an
earth-born Titan, which heaveth up its gray head, even as--"

"Spare us farther description," said the Sub-Prior; "we know the spot.
But that youth hath not since been heard of, and it will fall on you to
account for him."

"My bairn! my bairn!" exclaimed Dame Glendinning. "Yes, holy
father, make the villain account for my bairn!"

"I swear, good woman, by bread and by water,--which are the props of
our life--"

"Swear by wine and wastel-bread, for these are the props of _thy_
life, thou greedy Southron!" said Dame Glendinning;--"a base
belly-god, to come here to eat the best, and practise on our lives
that give it to him!"

"I tell thee, woman," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "I did but go with thy
son to the hunting."

"A black hunting it has been to him, poor bairn," replied Tibb; "and
sae I said it wad prove since I first saw the false Southron snout of
thee.  Little good comes of a Piercie's hunting, from Chevy Chase till
now."

"Be silent, woman," said the Sub-Prior, "and rail not upon the English
knight; we do not yet know of any thing beyond suspicion."

"We will have his heart's blood!" said Dame Glendinning; and, seconded
by the faithful Tibbie, she made such a sudden onslaught on the
unlucky Euphuist, as must have terminated in something serious, had
not the monk, aided by Mysie Happer, interposed to protect him from
their fury. Edward had left the apartment the instant the disturbance
broke out, and now entered, sword in hand, followed by Martin and
Jasper, the one having a hunting spear in his hand, the other a
cross-bow.

"Keep the door," he said to his two attendants; "shoot him or stab him
without mercy, should he attempt to break forth; if he offers an
escape, by Heaven he shall die!"

"How now, Edward," said the Sub-Prior; "how is this that you so far
forget yourself? meditating violence to a guest, and in my presence, who
represent your liege lord?"

Edward stepped forward with his drawn sword in his hand. "Pardon me,
reverend father," he said, "but in this matter the voice of nature
speaks louder and stronger than yours. I turn my sword's point against
this proud man, and I demand of him the blood of my brother--the blood
of my father's son--of the heir of our name! If he denies to give me a
true account of him, he shall not deny me vengeance."

Embarrassed as he was, Sir Piercie Shafton showed no personal fear.
"Put up thy sword," he said, "young man; not in the same day does
Piercie Shafton contend with two peasants."

"Hear him! he confesses the deed, holy father," said Edward.

"Be patient, my son," said the Sub-Prior, endeavouring to soothe the
feelings which he could not otherwise control, "be patient--thou wilt
attain the ends of justice better through my means than thine own
violence--And you, women, be silent--Tibb, remove your mistress and Mary
Avenel."

While Tibb, with the assistance of the other females of the household,
bore the poor mother and Mary Avenel into separate apartments, and
while Edward, still keeping his sword in his hand, hastily traversed
the room, as if to prevent the possibility of Sir Piercie Shafton's
escape, the Sub-Prior insisted upon knowing from the perplexed knight
the particulars which he knew respecting Halbert Glendinning. His
situation became extremely embarrassing, for what he might with safety
have told of the issue of their combat was so revolting to his pride,
that he could not bring himself to enter into the detail; and of
Halbert's actual fate he knew, as the reader is well aware, absolutely
nothing.

The father in the meanwhile pressed him with remonstrances, and prayed
him to observe, he would greatly prejudice himself by declining to
give a full account of the transactions of the day. "You cannot deny,"
he said, "that yesterday you seemed to take the most violent offence
at this unfortunate youth; and that you suppressed your resentment so
suddenly as to impress us all with surprise. Last night you proposed
to him this day's hunting party, and you set out together by break of
day. You parted, you said, at the fountain near the rock, about an
hour or twain after sunrise, and it appears that before you parted you
had been at strife together."

"I said not so," replied the knight. "Here is a coil indeed about the
absence of a rustical bondsman, who, I dare say, hath gone off (if he
be gone) to join the next rascally band of freebooters! Ye ask me, a
knight of the Piercie's lineage, to account for such an insignificant
fugitive, and I answer,--let me know the price of his head, and I will
pay it to your convent treasurer."

"You admit, then, that you have slain my brother?" said Edward,
interfering once more; "I will presently show you at what price we
Scots rate the lives of our friends."

"Peace, Edward, peace--I entreat--I command thee," said the Sub-Prior.
"And you, Sir Knight, think better of us than to suppose you may spend
Scottish blood, and reckon for it as for wine spilt in a drunken
revel.  This youth was no bondsman--thou well knowest, that in thine
own land thou hadst not dared to lift thy sword against the meanest
subject of England, but her laws would have called thee to answer for
the deed. Do not hope it will be otherwise here, for you will but
deceive yourself."

"You drive me beyond my patience," said the Euphuist, "even as the
over-driven ox is urged into madness!--What can I tell you of a young
fellow whom I have not seen since the second hour after sunrise?"

"But can you explain in what circumstances you parted with him?" said
the monk.

"What _are_ the circumstances, in the devil's name, which you
desire should be explained?--for although I protest against this
constraint as alike unworthy and inhospitable, yet would I willingly
end this fray, provided that by words it may be ended," said the
knight.

"If these end it not," said Edward, "blows shall, and that full
speedily."

"Peace, impatient boy!" said the Sub-Prior; "and do you, Sir Piercie
Shafton, acquaint me why the ground is bloody by the verge of the
fountain in Corri-nan-shian, where, as you say yourself, you parted
from Halbert Glendinning?"

Resolute not to avow his defeat if possibly he could avoid it, the
knight answered in a haughty tone, that he supposed it was no unusual
thing to find the turf bloody where hunters had slain a deer.

"And did you bury your game as well as kill it?" said the monk. "We
must know from you who is the tenant of that grave, that newly-made
grave, beside the very fountain whose margin is so deeply crimsoned
with blood?--thou seest thou canst not evade me; therefore be
ingenuous, and tell us the fate of this unhappy youth, whose body is
doubtless lying under that bloody turf."

"If it be," said Sir Piercie, "they must have buried him alive; for I
swear to thee, reverend father, that this rustic juvenal parted from
me in perfect health. Let the grave be searched, and if his body be
found, then deal with me as ye list."

"It is not my sphere to determine thy fate, Sir Knight, but that of the
Lord Abbot, and the right reverend Chapter. It is but my duty to collect
such information as may best possess their wisdom with the matters which
have chanced."

"Might I presume so far, reverend father," said the knight, "I should
wish to know the author and evidence of all these suspicions, so
unfoundedly urged against me?"

"It is soon told," said the Sub-Prior; "nor do I wish to disguise it,
if it can avail you in your defence. This maiden, Mary Avenel,
apprehending that you nourished malice against her foster-brother
under a friendly brow, did advisedly send up the old man, Martin
Tacket, to follow your footsteps and to prevent mischief. But it seems
that your evil passions had outrun precaution: for when he came to the
spot, guided by your footsteps upon the dew, he found but the bloody
turf and the new covered grave; and after long and vain search through
the wilds after Halbert and yourself, he brought back the sorrowful
news to her who had sent him."

"Saw he not my doublet, I pray you?" said Sir Piercie; "for when I
came to myself, I found that I was wrapped in my cloak, but without my
under garment as your reverence may observe."

So saying, he opened his cloak, forgetting, with his characteristical
inconsistency, that he showed his shirt stained with blood.

"How! cruel man," said the monk, when he observed this confirmation of
his suspicions; "wilt thou deny the guilt, even while thou bearest on
thy person the blood thou hast shed?--Wilt thou longer deny that thy
rash hand has robbed a mother of a son, our community of a vassal, the
Queen of Scotland of a liege subject? and what canst thou expect, but
that, at the least, we deliver thee up to England, as undeserving our
farther protection?"

"By the Saints!" said the knight, now driven to extremity, "if this
blood be the witness against me, it is but rebel blood, since this
morning at sunrise it flowed within my own veins."

"How were that possible, Sir Piercie Shafton," said the monk, "since I
see no wound from whence it can have flowed?"

"That," said the knight, "is the most mysterious part of the transaction
--See here!"

So saying, he undid his shirt collar, and, opening his bosom, showed
the spot through--which Halbert's sword had passed, but already
cicatrized, and bearing the appearance of a wound lately healed.

"This exhausts my patience, Sir Knight," said the Sub-Prior, "and is
adding insult to violence and injury. Do you hold me for a child or an
idiot, that you pretend to make me believe that the fresh blood with
which your shirt is stained, flowed from a wound which has been healed
for weeks or months? Unhappy mocker, thinkest thou thus to blind us?
Too well do we know that it is the blood of your victim, wrestling
with you in the desperate and mortal struggle, which has thus dyed
your apparel."

The knight, after a moment's recollection, said in reply, "I will be
open with you, my father--bid these men stand out of ear-shot, and I
will tell you all I know of this mysterious business; and muse not,
good father, though it may pass thy wit to expound it, for I avouch to
you it is too dark for mine own."

The monk commanded Edward and the two men to withdraw, assuring the
former that his conference with the prisoner should be brief, and
giving him permission to keep watch at the door of the apartment;
without which allowance he might, perhaps, have had some difficulty in
procuring his absence. Edward had no sooner left the chamber, than he
despatched messengers to one or two families of the Halidome, with
whose sons his brother and he sometimes associated, to tell them that
Halbert Glendinning had been murdered by an Englishman, and to require
them to repair to the Tower of Glendearg without delay. The duty of
revenge in such cases was held so sacred, that he had no reason to
doubt they would instantly come with such assistance as would ensure
the detention of the prisoner.  He then locked the doors of the tower,
both inner and outer, and also the gate of the court-yard. Having
taken these precautions, he made a hasty visit to the females of the
family, exhausting himself in efforts to console them, and in
protestations that he would have vengeance for his murdered brother.




Chapter the Twenty-Seventh.


  Now, by Our Lady, Sheriff,'tis hard reckoning,
  That I, with every odds of birth and barony
  Should be detain'd here for the casual death
  Of a wild forester, whose utmost having
  Is but the brazen buckle of the belt
  In which he sticks his hedge-knife.
                                        OLD PLAY.

While Edward was making preparations for securing and punishing the
supposed murderer of his brother, with an intense thirst for
vengeance, which had not hitherto shown itself as part of his
character, Sir Piercie Shafton made such communications as it pleased
him to the Sub-Prior, who listened with great attention, though the
knight's narrative was none of the clearest, especially as his
self-conceit led him to conceal or abridge the details which were
necessary to render it intelligible.

"You are to know," he said, "reverend father, that this rustical
juvenal having chosen to offer me, in the presence of your venerable
Superior, yourself, and other excellent and worthy persons, besides
the damsel, Mary Avenel, whom I term my Discretion in all honour and
kindness, a gross insult, rendered yet more intolerable by the time
and place, my just resentment did so gain the mastery over my
discretion, that I resolved to allow him the privileges of an equal,
and to indulge him with the combat."

"But, Sir Knight," said the Sub-Prior, "you still leave two matters
very obscure. First, why the token he presented to you gave you so
much offence, as I with others witnessed; and then again, how the
youth, whom you then met for the first, or, at least, the second time,
knew so much of your history as enabled him so greatly to move you."

The knight coloured very deeply.

"For your first query," he said, "most reverend father, we will, if
you please, pretermit it as nothing essential to the matter in hand;
and for the second--I protest to you that I know as little of his
means of knowledge as you do, and that I am well-nigh persuaded he
deals with Sathanas, of which more anon.--Well, sir--In the evening, I
failed not to veil my purpose with a pleasant brow, as is the custom
amongst us martialists, who never display the bloody colours of
defiance in our countenance until our hand is armed to fight under
them. I amused the fair Discretion with some canzonettes, and other
toys, which could not but be ravishing to her inexperienced ears. I
arose in the morning, and met my antagonist, who, to say truth, for an
inexperienced villagio, comported himself as stoutly as I could have
desired.--So, coming to the encounter, reverend sir, I did try his
mettle with some half-a-dozen of downright passes, with any one of
which I could have been through his body, only that I was loth to take
so fatal an advantage, but rather, mixing mercy with my just
indignation, studied to inflict upon him some flesh-wound of no very
fatal quality. But, sir, in the midst of my clemency, he, being
instigated, I think, by the devil, did follow up his first offence
with some insult of the same nature. Whereupon, being eager to punish
him, I made an estramazone, and my foot slipping at the same
time,--not from any fault of fence on my part, or any advantage of
skill on his, but the devil having, as I said, taken up the matter in
hand, and the grass being slippery,--ere I recovered my position I
encountered his sword, which he had advanced, with my undefended
person, so that, as I think, I was in some sort run through the body.
My juvenal, being beyond measure appalled at his own unexpected and
unmerited success in this strange encounter, takes the flight and
leaves me there, and I fall into a dead swoon for the lack of the
blood I had lost so foolishly--and when I awake, as from a sound
sleep, I find myself lying, an it like you, wrapt up in my cloak at
the foot of one of the birch-trees which stand together in a clump
near to this place.  I feel my limbs, and experience little pain, but
much weakness--I put my hand to the wound--it was whole and skinned
over as you now see it--I rise and come hither; and in these words you
have my whole day's story."

"I can only reply to so strange a tale," answered the monk, "that it
is scarce possible that Sir Piercie Shafton can expect me to credit
it. Here is a quarrel, the cause of which you conceal--a wound
received in the morning, of which there is no recent appearance at
sunset,--a grave filled up, in which no body is deposited--the
vanquished found alive and well--the victor departed no man knows
whither. These things, Sir Knight, hang not so well together, that I
should receive them as gospel."

"Reverend father," answered Sir Piercie Shafton, "I pray you in the
first place to observe, that if I offer peaceful and civil
justification of that which I have already averred to be true, I do so
only in devout deference to your dress and to your order, protesting,
that to any other opposite, saving a man of religion, a lady or my
liege prince, I would not deign to support that which I had once
attested, otherwise than with the point of my good sword. And so much
being premised, I have to add, that I can but gage my honour as a
gentleman, and my faith as a Catholic Christian, that the things which
I have described to you have happened to me as I have described them,
and not otherwise."

"It is a deep assertion, Sir Knight," answered the Sub-Prior; "yet,
bethink you, it is only an assertion, and that no reason can be
alleged why things should be believed which are so contrary to reason.
Let me pray you to say whether the grave, which has been seen at your
place of combat, was open or closed when your encounter took place?"

"Reverend father," said the knight, "I will veil from you nothing, but
show you each secret of my bosom; even as the pure fountain revealeth
the smallest pebble which graces the sand at the bottom of its crystal
mirror, and as--"

"Speak in plain terms, for the love of heaven!" said the monk; "these
holiday phrases belong not to solemn affairs--Was the grave open when
the conflict began?"

"It was," answered the knight, "I acknowledge it; even as he that
acknowledgeth--"

"Nay, I pray you, fair son, forbear these similitudes, and observe me.
On yesterday at even no grave was found in that place, for old Martin
chanced, contrary to his wont, to go thither in quest of a strayed
sheep. At break of day, by your own confession, a grave was opened in
that spot, and there a combat was fought--only one of the combatants
appears, and he is covered with blood, and to all appearance
woundless."--Here the knight made a gesture of impatience.--"Nay, fair
son, hear me but one moment--the grave is closed and covered by the
sod--what can we believe, but that it conceals the bloody corpse of
the fallen duellist?"

"By Heaven, it cannot!" said the knight, "unless the juvenal hath
slain himself and buried himself, in order to place me in the
predicament of his murderer."

"The grave shall doubtless be explored, and that by to-morrow's dawn,"
said the monk, "I will see it done with mine own eyes"

"But," said the prisoner, "I protest against all evidence which may
arise from its contents, and do insist beforehand, that whatever may
be found in that grave shall not prejudice me in my defence. I have
been so haunted by diabolical deceptions in this matter, that what do
I know but that the devil may assume the form of this rustical
juvenal, in order to procure me farther vexation?--I protest to you,
holy father, it is my very thought that there is witchcraft in all
that hath befallen me. Since I entered into this northern land, in
which men say that sorceries do abound, I, who am held in awe and
regard even by the prime gallants in the court of Feliciana, have been
here bearded and taunted by a clod-treading clown. I, whom Vincentio
Saviola termed his nimblest and most agile disciple, was, to speak
briefly, foiled by a cow-boy, who knew no more of fence than is used
at every country wake. I am run, as it seemed to me, through the body,
with a very sufficient stoccata, and faint on the spot; and yet, when
I recover, I find myself without either wem or wound, and, lacking
nothing of my apparel, saving my murrey-coloured doublet, slashed with
satin, which I will pray may be inquired after, lest the devil, who
transported me, should have dropped it in his passage among some of
the trees or bushes--it being a choice and most fanciful piece of
raiment, which I wore for the first time at the Queen's pageant in
Southwark."

"Sir Knight," said the monk, "you do again go astray from this matter.
I inquire of you respecting that which concerns the life of another
man, and it may be, touches your own also, and you answer me with the
tale of an old doublet!"

"Old!" exclaimed the knight; "now, by the gods and saints, if there be
a gallant at the British Court more fancifully considerate, and more
considerately fanciful, but quaintly curious, and more curiously
quaint, in frequent changes of all rich articles of vesture, becoming
one who may be accounted point-de-vice a courtier, I will give you
leave to term me a slave and a liar."

The monk thought, but did not say, that he had already acquired right
to doubt the veracity of the Euphuist, considering the marvellous tale
which he had told. Yet his own strange adventure, and that of Father
Philip, rushed on his mind, and forbade his coming to any conclusion.
He contented himself, therefore, with observing, that these were
certainly strange incidents, and requested to know if Sir Piercie
Shafton had any other reason for suspecting himself to be in a manner
so particularly selected for the sport of sorcery and witchcraft.

"Sir Sub-Prior," said the Euphuist, "the most extraordinary
circumstance remains behind, which alone, had I neither been bearded
in dispute, nor foiled in combat, nor wounded and cured in the space
of a few hours, would nevertheless of itself, and without any other
corroborative, have compelled me to believe myself the subject of some
malevolent fascination.  Reverend sir, it is not to your ears that men
should tell tales of love and gallantry, nor is Sir Piercie Shafton
one who, to any ears whatsoever, is wont to boast of his fair
acceptance with the choice and prime beauties of the court; insomuch
that a lady, none of the least resplendent constellations which
revolve in that hemisphere of honour, pleasure, and beauty, but whose
name I here pretermit, was wont to call me her Taciturnity.
Nevertheless truth must be spoken; and I cannot but allow, as the
general report of the court, allowed in camps, and echoed back by city
and country, that in the alacrity of the accost, the tender delicacy
of the regard, the facetiousness of the address, the adopting and
pursuing of the fancy, the solemn close and the graceful fall-off,
Piercie Shafton was accounted the only gallant of the time, and so
well accepted among the choicer beauties of the age, that no
silk-hosed reveller of the presence-chamber, or plumed jouster of the
tilt-yard, approached him by a bow's length in the ladies' regard,
being the mark at which every well-born and generous juvenal aimeth
his shaft.  Nevertheless, reverend sir, having found in this rude
place something which by blood and birth might be termed a lady, and
being desirous to keep my gallant humour in exercise, as well as to
show my sworn devotion to the sex in general, I did shoot off some
arrows of compliment at this Mary Avenel, terming her my Discretion,
with other quaint and well-imagined courtesies, rather bestowed out of
my bounty than warranted by her merit, or perchance like unto the
boyish fowler, who, rather than not exercise his bird-piece, will
shoot at crows or magpies for lack of better game----"

"Mary Avenel is much obliged by your notice," answered the monk; "but
to what does all this detail of past and present gallantry conduct
us?"

"Marry, to this conclusion," answered the knight; "that either this my
Discretion, or I myself, am little less than bewitched; for, instead
of receiving my accost with a gratifying bow, answering my regard with
a suppressed smile, accompanying my falling off or departure with a
slight sigh--honours with which I protest to you the noblest dancers
and proudest beauties in Feliciana have graced my poor services--she
hath paid me as little and as cold regard as if I had been some
hob-nailed clown of these bleak mountains! Nay, this very day, while I
was in the act of kneeling at her feet to render her the succours of
this pungent quintessence, of purest spirit distilled by the fairest
hands of the court of Feliciana, she pushed me from her with looks
which savoured of repugnance, and, as I think, thrust at me with her
foot as if to spurn me from her presence. These things, reverend
father, are strange, portentous, unnatural, and befall not in the
current of mortal affairs, but are symptomatic of sorcery and
fascination.  So that, having given to your reverence a perfect,
simple, and plain account of all that I know concerning this matter, I
leave it to your wisdom to solve what may be found soluble in the
same, it being my purpose to-morrow, with the peep of dawn, to set
forward towards Edinburgh."

"I grieve to be an interruption to your designs, Sir Knight," said the
monk, "but that purpose of thine may hardly be fulfilled."

"How, reverend father!" said the knight, with an air of the utmost
surprise; "if what you say respects my departure, understand that it
_must_ be, for I have so resolved it."

"Sir Knight," reiterated the Sub-Prior, "I must once more repeat, this
_cannot_ be, until the Abbot's pleasure be known in the matter."

"Reverend sir," said the knight, drawing himself up with great
dignity, "I desire my hearty and thankful commendations to the Abbot;
but in this matter I have nothing to do with his reverend pleasure,
designing only to consult my own."

"Pardon me," said the Sub-Prior; "the Lord Abbot hath in this matter
a voice potential."

Sir Piercie Shafton's colour began to rise--"I marvel," he said, "to
hear your reverence talk thus--What! will you, for the imagined death
of a rude, low-born frampler and wrangler, venture to impinge upon the
liberty of the kinsman of the house of Piercie?"

"Sir Knight," returned the Sub-Prior, civilly, "your high lineage and
your kindling anger will avail you nothing in this matter--You shall
not come here to seek a shelter, and then spill our blood as if it
were water."

"I tell you," said the knight, "once more, as I have told you already,
that there was no blood spilled but mine own!"

"That remains to be proved," replied the Sub-Prior; "we of the
community of Saint Mary's of Kennaquhair, use not to take fairy tales in
exchange for the lives of our liege vassals."

"We of the house of Piercie," answered Shafton, "brook neither threats
nor restraint--I say I will travel to-morrow, happen what may!"

"And I," answered the Sub-Prior, in the same tone of determination,
"say that I will break your journey, come what may!"

"Who shall gainsay me," said the knight, "if I make my way by force?"

"You will judge wisely to think ere you make such an attempt," answered
the monk, with composure; "there are men enough in the Halidome to
vindicate its rights over those who dare infringe them."

"My cousin of Northumberland will know how to revenge this usage to
a beloved kinsman so near to his blood," said the Englishman.

"The Lord Abbot will know how to protect the rights of his territory,
both with, the temporal and spiritual sword," said the monk. "Besides,
consider, were we to send you to your kinsman at Alnwick or Warkworth
to-morrow, he dare do nothing but transmit you in fetters to the Queen
of England. Bethink, Sir Knight, that you stand on slippery ground,
and will act most wisely in reconciling yourself to be a prisoner in
this place until the Abbot shall decide the matter. There are armed
men enow to countervail all your efforts at escape. Let patience and
resignation, therefore, arm you to a necessary submission."

So saying, he clapped his hands, and called aloud. Edward entered,
accompanied by two young men who had already joined him, and were well
armed.

"Edward," said the Sub-Prior, "you will supply the English Knight here
in this spence with suitable food and accommodation for the night,
treating him with as much kindness as if nothing had happened between
you. But you will place a sufficient guard, and look carefully that he
make not his escape. Should he attempt to break forth, resist him to
the death; but in no other case harm a hair of his head, as you shall
be answerable."

Edward Glendinning replied,--"That I may obey your commands, reverend
sir, I will not again offer myself to this person's presence; for
shame it were to me to break the peace of the Halidome, but not less
shame to leave my brother's death unavenged."

As he spoke, his lips grew livid, the blood forsook his cheek, and he
was about to leave the apartment, when the Sub-Prior recalled him and
said in a solemn tone,--"Edward, I have known you from infancy--I have
done what lay within my reach to be of use to you--I say nothing of
what you owe to me as the representative of your spiritual Superior--I
say nothing of the duty from the vassal to the Sub-Prior--But Father
Eustace expects from the pupil whom he has nurtured--he expects from
Edward Glendinning, that he will not by any deed of sudden violence,
however justified in his own mind by the provocation, break through
the respect due to public justice, or that which he has an especial
right to claim from him."

"Fear nothing, my reverend father, for so in an hundred senses may I
well term you," said the young man; "fear not, I would say, that I
will in any thing diminish the respect I owe to the venerable
community by whom we have so long been protected, far less that I will
do aught which can be personally less than respectful to you. But the
blood of my brother must not cry for vengeance in vain--your reverence
knows our Border creed."

"'Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I will requite it,'" answered
the monk. "The heathenish custom of deadly feud which prevails in this
land, through which each man seeks vengeance at his own hand when the
death of a friend or kinsman has chanced, hath already deluged our
vales with the blood of Scottish men, spilled by the hands of
countrymen and kindred. It were endless to count up the fatal results.
On the Eastern Border, the Homes are at feud with the Swintons and
Cockburns; in our Middle Marches, the Scotts and Kerrs have spilled as
much brave blood in domestic feud as might have fought a pitched field
in England, could they have but forgiven and forgotten a casual
rencounter that placed their names in opposition to each other. On the
west frontier, the Johnstones are at war with the Maxwells, the
Jardines with the Bells, drawing with them the flower of the country,
which should place their breasts as a bulwark against England, into
private and bloody warfare, of which it is the only end to waste and
impair the forces of the country, already divided in itself. Do not,
my dear son Edward, permit this bloody prejudice to master your mind.
I cannot ask you to think of the crime supposed as if the blood
spilled had been less dear to you--Alas! I know that is impossible.
But I do require you, in proportion to your interest in the supposed
sufferer, (for as yet the whole is matter of supposition,) to bear on
your mind the evidence on which the guilt of the accused person must
be tried. He hath spoken with me, and I confess his tale is so
extraordinary, that I should have, without a moment's hesitation,
rejected it as incredible, but that an affair which chanced to myself
in this very glen--More of that another time--Suffice it for the
present to say, that from what I have myself experienced, I deem it
possible, that, extraordinary as Sir Piercie Shafton's story may seem,
I hold it not utterly impossible."

"Father," said Edward Glendinning, when he saw that his preceptor
paused, unwilling farther to explain upon what grounds he was inclined
to give a certain degree of credit to Sir Piercie Shafton's story,
while he admitted it as improbable--"Father to me you have been in
every sense.  You know that my hand grasped more readily to the book
than to the sword; and that I lacked utterly the ready and bold spirit
which distinguished----" Here his voice faltered, and he paused for a
moment, and then went on with resolution and rapidity--"I would say,
that I was unequal to Halbert in promptitude of heart and of hand; but
Halbert is gone, and I stand his representative, and that of my
father--his successor in all his rights," (while he said this his eyes
shot fire,) "and bound to assert and maintain them as he would have
done--therefore I am a changed man, increased in courage as in my
rights and pretensions. And, reverend father, respectfully, but
plainly and firmly do I say, his blood, if it has been shed by this
man, shall be atoned--Halbert shall not sleep neglected in his lonely
grave, as if with him the spirit of my father had ceased forever. His
blood flows in my veins, and while his has been poured forth
unrequited, mine will permit me no rest. My poverty and meanness of
rank shall not avail the lordly murderer. My calm nature and peaceful
studies shall not be his protection.  Even the obligations, holy
father, which I acknowledge to you, shall not be his protection. I
wait with patience the judgment of the Abbot and Chapter, for the
slaughter of one of their most anciently descended vassals. If they do
right to my brother's memory, it is well. But mark me, father, if they
shall fail in rendering me that justice, I bear a heart and a hand
which, though I love not such extremities, are capable of remedying
such an error.  He who takes up my brother's succession must avenge
his death."

The monk perceived with surprise, that Edward, with his extreme
diffidence, humility, and obedient assiduity, for such were his
general characteristics, had still boiling in his veins the wild
principles of those from whom he was descended, and by whom he was
surrounded. His eyes sparkled, his frame was agitated, and the
extremity of his desire for vengeance seemed to give a vehemence to
his manner resembling the restlessness of joy.

"May God help us," said Father Eustace, "for, frail wretches as we are,
we cannot help ourselves under sudden and strong temptation.--Edward,
I will rely on your word that you do nothing rashly."

"That will I not," said Edward,--"that, my better than father, I
surely will not. But the blood of my brother,--the tears of my
mother--and--and--and of Mary Avenel, shall not be shed in vain. I
will not deceive you, father--if this Piercie Shafton hath slain my
brother, he dies, if the whole blood of the whole house of Piercie
were in his veins."

There was a deep and solemn determination in the utterance of Edward
Glendinning expressive of a rooted resolution. The Sub-Prior sighed
deeply, and for the moment yielded to circumstances, and urged the
acquiescence of his pupil no farther. He commanded lights to be placed
in the lower chamber, which for a time he paced in silence.

A thousand ideas, and even differing principles, debated with each
other in his bosom. He greatly doubted the English knight's account of
the duel, and of what had followed it. Yet the extraordinary and
supernatural circumstances which had befallen the Sacristan and
himself in that very glen, prevented him from being absolutely
incredulous on the score of the wonderful wound and recovery of Sir
Piercie Shafton, and prevented him from at once condemning as
impossible that which was altogether improbable. Then he was at a loss
how to control the fraternal affections of Edward, with respect to
whom he felt something like the keeper of a wild animal, a lion's
whelp or tiger's cub, which he has held under his command from
infancy, but which, when grown to maturity, on some sudden provocation
displays his fangs and talons, erects his crest, resumes his savage
nature, and bids defiance at once to his keeper and to all mankind.

How to restrain and mitigate an ire which the universal example of the
times rendered deadly and inveterate, was sufficient cause of anxiety
to Father Eustace. But he had also to consider the situation of his
community, dishonoured and degraded by submitting to suffer the
slaughter of a vassal to pass unavenged; a circumstance which of
itself might in those times have afforded pretext for a revolt among
their wavering adherents, or, on the other hand, exposed the community
to imminent danger, should they proceed against a subject of England
of high degree, connected with the house of Northumberland, and other
northern families of high rank, who, as they possessed the means,
could not be supposed to lack inclination, to wreak upon the patrimony
of Saint Mary of Kennaquhair, any violence which might be offered to
their kinsman.

In either case, the Sub-Prior well knew that the ostensible cause of
feud, insurrection, or incursion, being once afforded, the case would
not be ruled either by reason or by evidence, and he groaned in spirit
when, upon counting up the chances which arose in this ambiguous
dilemma, he found he had only a choice of difficulties. He was a monk,
but he felt also as a man, indignant at the supposed slaughter of
young Glendinning by one skilful in all the practice of arms, in which
the vassal of the Monastery was most likely to be deficient; and to
aid the resentment which he felt for the loss of a youth whom he had
known from infancy, came in full force the sense of dishonour arising
to his community from passing over so gross an insult unavenged. Then
the light in which it might be viewed by those who at present presided
in the stormy Court of Scotland, attached as they were to the
Reformation, and allied by common faith and common interest with Queen
Elizabeth, was a formidable subject of apprehension. The Sub-Prior
well knew how they lusted after the revenues of the Church, (to
express it in the ordinary phrase of the religious of the time,) and
how readily they would grasp at such a pretext for encroaching on
those of Saint Mary's, as would be afforded by the suffering to pass
unpunished the death of a native Scottishman by a Catholic Englishman,
a rebel to Queen Elizabeth.

On the other hand, to deliver up to England, or, which was nearly the
same thing, the Scottish administration, an English knight leagued
with the Piercie by kindred and political intrigue, a faithful
follower of the Catholic Church, who had fled to the Halidome for
protection, was, in the estimation of the Sub-Prior, an act most
unworthy in itself, and meriting the malediction of Heaven, besides
being, moreover, fraught with great temporal risk.  If the government
of Scotland was now almost entirely in the hands of the Protestant
party, the Queen was still a Catholic, and there was no knowing when,
amid the sudden changes which agitated that tumultuous country, she
might find herself at the head of her own affairs, and able to protect
those of her own faith. Then, if the Court of England and its Queen
were zealously Protestant, the northern counties, whose friendship or
enmity were of most consequence in the first instance to the community
of Saint Mary's, contained many Catholics, the heads of whom were
able, and must be supposed willing, to avenge any injury suffered by
Sir Piercie Shafton.

On either side, the Sub-Prior, thinking, according to his sense of
duty, most anxiously for the safety and welfare of his Monastery, saw
the greatest risk of damage, blame, inroad, and confiscation. The only
course on which he could determine, was to stand by the helm like a
resolute pilot, watch every contingence, do his best to weather each
reef and shoal, and commit the rest to heaven and his patroness.

As he left the apartment, the knight called after him, beseeching he
would order his trunk-mails to be sent into his apartment,
understanding he was to be guarded there for the night, as he wished
to make some alteration in his apparel.

[Footnote: Sir Piercie Shafton's extreme love of dress was an
attribute of the coxcombs of this period. The display made by their
forefathers was in the numbers of their retinue; but as the actual
influence of the nobility began to be restrained both in France and
England by the increasing power of the crown, the indulgence of vanity
in personal display became more inordinate. There are many allusions
to this change of custom in Shakspeare and other dramatic writers,
where the reader may find mention made of

  "Bonds enter'd into
  For gay apparel against the triumph day."

Jonson informs us, that for the first entrance of a gallant, "'twere
good you turned four or five hundred acres of your best land into two
or three trunks of apparel."--_Every Man out of his Humour._

In the Memorie of the Somerville family, a curious instance occurs of
this fashionable species of extravagance.  In the year 1537, when
James V. brought over his shortlived bride from France, the Lord
Somerville of the day was so profuse in the expense of his apparel,
that the money which he borrowed on the occasion was compensated by a
perpetual annuity of threescore pounds Scottish, payable out of the
barony of Carnwarth till doomsday, which was assigned by the creditor
to Saint Magdalen's Chapel. By this deep expense the Lord Somerville
had rendered himself so glorious in apparel, that the King, who saw so
brave a gallant enter the gate of Holyrood, followed, by only two
pages, called upon several of the courtiers to ascertain who it could
be who was so richly dressed and so slightly attended, and he was not
recognised until he entered the presence-chamber. "You are very brave,
my lord," said the King, as he received his homage; "but where are all
your men and attendants?" The Lord Somerville readily answered, "If it
please your Majesty, here they are," pointing to the lace that was on
his own and his pages' clothes: whereat the King laughed heartily, and
having surveyed the finery more nearly, bade him have away with it
all, and let him have his stout band of spears again.

There is a scene in Jonson's "Every Man out of his Humour," (Act IV.
Scene 6.) in which a Euphuist of the time gives an account of the
effects of a duel on the clothes of himself and his opponent, and
never departs a syllable from the catalogue of his wardrobe. We shall
insert it in evidence that the foppery of our ancestors was not
inferior to that of our own time.

"_Fastidius_. Good faith, Signior, now you speak of a quarrel,
I'll acquaint you with a difference that happened between a gallant
and myself, Sir Puntarvolo. You know him if I should name him--Signor
Luculento.

"_Punt_. Luculento! What inauspicious chance interposed itself to
your two lives?

"_Fast_. Faith, sir, the same that sundered Agamemnon, and great
Thetis' son; but let the cause escape, sir. He sent me a challenge,
mixt with some few braves, which I restored; and, in fine, we met. Now
indeed, sir, I must tell you, he did offer at first very desperately,
but without judgment; for look you, sir, I cast myself into this
figure; now he came violently on, and withal advancing his rapier to
strike, I thought to have took his arm, for he had left his body to my
election, and I was sure he could not recover his guard.  Sir, I mist
my purpose in his arm, rashed his doublet sleeves, ran him close by
the left cheek and through his hair. He, again, light me here--I had
on a gold cable hat-band, then new come up, about a murrey French hat
I had; cuts my hat-band, and yet it was massy goldsmith's work, cuts
my brim, which, by good fortune, being thick embroidered with gold
twist and spangles, disappointed the force of the blow; nevertheless
it grazed on my shoulder, takes me away six purls of an Italian
cut-work band I wore, cost me three pounds in the Exchange but three
days before.

"_Punt_. This was a strange encounter.

"_Fast_. Nay, you shall hear, sir. With this, we both fell out
and breathed. Now, upon the second sign of his assault, I betook me to
my former manner of defence; he, on the other side, abandoned his body
to the same danger as before, and follows me still with blows; but I,
being loath to take the deadly advantage that lay before me of his
left side, made a kind of stramazoun, ran him up to the hilt through
the doublet, through the shirt, and yet missed the skin. He, making a
reverse blow, falls upon my embossed girdle,--I had thrown off the
hangers a little before,--strikes off a skirt of a thick-laced satin
doublet I had, lined with four taffetas, cuts off two panes
embroidered with pearl, rends through the drawings-out of tissue,
enters the linings, and spiks the flesh.

"_Car_. I wonder he speaks not of his wrought shirt.

"_Fast_. Here, in the opinion of mutual damage, we paused. But,
ere I proceed, I must tell you, signior, that in the last encounter,
not having leisure to put off my silver spurs, one of the rowels
catched hold of the ruffles of my boot, and, being Spanish leather and
subject to tear, overthrows me, rends me two pair of silk stockings
that I put on, being somewhat of a raw morning, a peach colour and
another, and strikes me some half-inch deep into the side of the calf:
He, seeing the blood come, presently takes horse and away; I having
bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought shirt--

"_Car_. O, comes it in there.

"_Fast_. Ride after him, and, lighting at the court gate both
together, embraced, and marched hand in hand up into the presence. Was
not this business well carried?

"_Maci_. Well! yes; and by this we can guess what apparel the
gentleman wore.

"_Punt_. 'Fore valour! it was a designment begun with much
resolution, maintained with as much prowess, and ended with more
humanity."]

"Ay, ay," said the monk, muttering as he went up the winding stair,
"carry him his trumpery with all despatch. Alas! that man, with so
many noble objects of pursuit, will amuse himself like a jackanape,
with a laced jerkin and a cap and bells!--I must now to the melancholy
work of consoling that which is well-nigh inconsolable, a mother
weeping for her first-born."

Advancing, after a gentle knock, into the apartment of the women, he
found that Mary Avenel had retired to bed, extremely indisposed, and
that Dame Glendinning and Tibb were indulging their sorrows by the
side of a decaying fire, and by the light of a small iron lamp, or
cruize, as it was termed. Poor Elspeth's apron was thrown over her
head, and bitterly did she sob and weep for "her beautiful, her
brave,--the very image of her dear Simon Glendinning, the stay of her
widowhood and the support of her old age."

The faithful Tibb echoed her complaints, and, more violently
clamorous, made deep promises of revenge on Sir Piercie Shafton, "if
there were a man left in the south who could draw a whinger, or a
woman that could thraw a rape." The presence of the Sub-Prior imposed
silence on these clamours. He sate down by the unfortunate mother, and
essayed, by such topics as his religion and reason suggested, to
interrupt the current of Dame Glendinning's feelings; but the attempt
was in vain. She listened, indeed, with some little interest, while he
pledged his word and his influence with the Abbot, that the family
which had lost their eldest-born by means of a guest received at his
command, should experience particular protection at the hands of the
community; and that the fief which belonged to Simon Glendinning
should, with extended bounds and added privileges, be conferred on
Edward.

But it was only for a very brief space that the mother's sobs were
apparently softer, and her grief more mild. She soon blamed herself
for casting a moment's thought upon world's gear while poor Halbert
was lying stretched in his bloody shirt. The Sub-Prior was not more
fortunate, when he promised that Halbert's body "should be removed to
hallowed ground, and his soul secured by the prayers of the Church in
his behalf." Grief would have its natural course, and the voice of the
comforter was wasted in vain.




Chapter the Twenty-Eighth.


  He is at liberty, I have ventured for him!
  -----------------------------if the law
  Find and condemn me for't, some living wenches,
  Some honest-hearted maids will sing my dirge,
  And tell to memory my death was noble,
  Dying almost a martyr.
                            THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.

The Sub-Prior of Saint Mary's, in taking his departure from the spence
which Sir Piercie Shafton was confined, and in which some preparations
were made for his passing the night as the room which might be most
conveniently guarded, left more than one perplexed person behind him.
There was connected with this chamber, and opening into it, a small
_outshot_, or projecting part of the building, occupied by a
sleeping apartment, which upon ordinary occasions, was that of Mary
Avenel, and which, in the unusual number of guests who had come to the
tower on the former evening, had also accommodated Mysie Happer, the
Miller's daughter; for anciently, as well as in the present day, a
Scottish house was always rather too narrow and limited for the extent
of the owner's hospitality, and some shift and contrivance was
necessary, upon any unusual occasion, to ensure the accommodation of
all the guests.

The fatal news of Halbert Glendinning's death had thrown all former
arrangements into confusion. Mary Avenel, whose case required
immediate attention, had been transported into the apartment hitherto
occupied by Halbert and his brother, as the latter proposed to watch
all night, in order to prevent the escape of the prisoner. Poor Mysie
had been altogether overlooked, and had naturally enough betaken
herself to the little apartment which she had hitherto occupied,
ignorant that the spence, through which lay the only access to it, was
to be the sleeping chamber of Sir Piercie Shafton. The measures taken
for securing him there had been so sudden, that she was not aware of
it, until she found that the other females had been removed from the
spence by the Sub-Prior's direction, and having once missed the
opportunity of retreating along with them, bashfulness, and the high
respect which she was taught to bear to the monks, prevented her
venturing forth alone, and intruding herself on the presence of Father
Eustace, while in secret conference with the Southron. There appeared
no remedy but to wait till their interview was over; and, as the door
was thin, and did not shut very closely, she could hear every word
that passed betwixt them.

It thus happened, that without any intended intrusion on her part, she
became privy to the whole conversation of the Sub-Prior and the
English knight, and could also observe from the window of her little
retreat, that more than one of the young men summoned by Edward
arrived successively at the tower. These circumstances led her to
entertain most serious apprehension that the life of Sir Piercie
Shafton was in great and instant peril.

Woman is naturally compassionate, and not less willingly so when youth
and fair features are on the side of him who claims her sympathy. The
handsome presence, elaborate dress and address, of Sir Piercie
Shafton, which had failed to make any favorable impression on the
grave and lofty character of Mary Avenel, had completely dazzled and
bewildered the poor Maid of the Mill. The knight had perceived this
result, and, flattered by seeing that his merit was not universally
underrated, he had bestowed on Mysie a good deal more of his courtesy
than in his opinion her rank warranted. It was not cast away, but
received with a devout sense of his condescension, and with gratitude
for his personal notice, which, joined to her fears for his safety,
and the natural tenderness of her disposition, began to make wild work
in her heart.

"To be sure it was very wrong in him to slay Halbert Glendinning," (it
was thus she argued the case with herself,) "but then he was a
gentleman born, and a soldier, and so gentle and courteous withal,
that she was sure the quarrel had been all of young Glendinning's own
seeking; for it was well known that both these lads were so taken up
with that Mary Avenel, that they never looked at another lass in the
Halidome, more than if they were of a different degree. And then
Halbert's dress was as clownish as his manners were haughty; and this
poor young gentleman, (who was habited like any prince,) banished from
his own land, was first drawn into a quarrel by a rude brangler, and
then persecuted and like to be put to death by his kin and allies."

Mysie wept bitterly at the thought, and then her heart rising against
such cruelty and oppression to a defenceless stranger, who dressed
with so much skill, and spoke with so much grace, she began to
consider whether she could not render him some assistance in this
extremity.

Her mind was now entirely altered from its original purpose. At first
her only anxiety had been to find the means of escaping from the
interior apartment, without being noticed by any one; but now she
began to think that Heaven had placed her there for the safety and
protection of the persecuted stranger. She was of a simple and
affectionate, but at the same time an alert and enterprising
character, possessing more than female strength of body, and more than
female courage, though with feelings as capable of being bewildered
with gallantry of dress and language, as a fine gentleman of any
generation would have desired to exercise his talents upon. "I will
save him," she thought, "that is the first thing to be resolved--and
then I wonder what he will say to the poor Miller's maiden, that has
done for him what all the dainty dames in London or Holyrood would
have been afraid to venture upon."

Prudence began to pull her sleeve as she indulged speculations so
hazardous, and hinted to her that the warmer Sir Piercie Shafton's
gratitude might prove, it was the more likely to be fraught with
danger to his benefactress.  Alas! poor Prudence, thou mayest say with
our moral teacher,

  "I preach for ever, but I preach in vain."

The Miller's maiden, while you pour your warning into her unwilling
bosom, has glanced her eye on the small mirror by which she has placed
her little lamp, and it returns to her a countenance and eyes, pretty
and sparkling at all times, but ennobled at present with the energy of
expression proper to those who have dared to form, and stand prepared
to execute, deeds of generous audacity. "Will these features--will
these eyes, joined to the benefit I am about to confer upon Sir
Piercie Shafton, do nothing towards removing the distance of rank
between us?"

Such was the question which female vanity asked of fancy; and though
even fancy dared not answer in a ready affirmative, a middle
conclusion was adopted--"Let me first succour the gallant youth, and
trust to fortune for the rest."

Banishing, therefore, from her mind every thing that was personal to
herself, the rash but generous girl turned her whole thoughts to the
means of executing this enterprise.

The difficulties which interposed were of no ordinary nature. The
vengeance of the men of that country, in cases of deadly feud, that
is, in cases of a quarrel excited by the slaughter of any of their
relations, was one of their most marked characteristics; and Edward,
however gentle in other respects, was so fond of his brother, that
there could be no doubt that he would be as signal in his revenge as
the customs of the country authorized.  There were to be passed the
inner door of the apartment, the two gates of the tower itself, and
the gate of the court-yard, ere the prisoner was at liberty; and then
a guide and means of flight were to be provided, otherwise ultimate
escape was impossible. But where the will of woman is strongly bent on
the accomplishment of such a purpose, her wit is seldom baffled by
difficulties, however embarrassing.

The Sub-Prior had not long left the apartment, ere Mysie had devised a
scheme for Sir Piercie Shafton's freedom, daring, indeed, but likely
to be successful, if dexterously conducted. It was necessary, however,
that she should remain where she was till so late an hour, that all in
the tower should have betaken themselves to repose, excepting those
whose duty made them watchers. The interval she employed in observing
the movements of the person in whose service she was thus boldly a
volunteer.

She could hear Sir Piercie Shafton pace the floor to and fro, in
reflection doubtless on his own untoward fate and precarious
situation. By and by she heard him making a rustling among his trunks,
which, agreeable to the order of the Sub-Prior, had been placed in the
apartment to which he was confined, and which he was probably amusing
more melancholy thoughts by examining and arranging. Then she could
hear him resume his walk through the room, and, as if his spirits had
been somewhat relieved and elevated by the survey of his wardrobe, she
could distinguish that at one turn he half recited a sonnet, at
another half whistled a galliard, and at the third hummed a saraband.
At length she could understand that he extended himself on the
temporary couch which had been allotted to him, after muttering his
prayers hastily, and in a short time she concluded he must be fast
asleep.

She employed the moment which intervened in considering her enterprise
under every different aspect; and dangerous as it was, the steady
review which she took of the various perils accompanying her purpose,
furnished her with plausible devices for obviating them. Love and
generous compassion, which give singly such powerful impulse to the
female heart, were in this case united, and championed her to the last
extremity of hazard.

It was an hour past midnight. All in the tower slept sound but those
who had undertaken to guard the English prisoner; or if sorrow and
suffering drove sleep from the bed of Dame Glendinning and her
foster-daughter, they were too much wrapt in their own griefs to
attend to external sounds.  The means of striking light were at hand
in the small apartment, and thus the Miller's maiden was enabled to
light and trim a small lamp. With a trembling step and throbbing
heart, she undid the door which separated her from the apartment in
which the Southron knight was confined, and almost flinched from her
fixed purpose, when she found herself in the same room with the
sleeping prisoner. She scarcely trusted herself to look upon him, as
he lay wrapped in his cloak, and fast asleep upon the pallet bed, but
turned her eyes away while she gently pulled his mantle with no more
force than was just equal to awaken him. He moved not until she had
twitched his cloak a second and a third time, and then at length
looking up, was about to make an exclamation in the suddenness of his
surprise.

Mysie's bashfulness was conquered by her fear. She placed her fingers
on her lips, in token that he must observe the most strict silence,
and then pointed to the door to intimate that it was watched.

Sir Piercie Shafton now collected himself and sat upright on his
couch.  He gazed with surprise on the graceful figure of the young
woman who stood before him; her well-formed person, her flowing hair,
and the outline of her features, showed dimly, and yet to advantage,
by the partial and feeble light which she held in her hand. The
romantic imagination of the gallant would soon have coined some
compliment proper for the occasion, but Mysie left him not time.

"I come," she said, "to save your life, which is else in great
peril--if you answer me, speak as low as you can, for they have
sentinelled your door with armed men."

"Comeliest of miller's daughters," answered Sir Piercie, who by this
time was sitting upright on his couch, "dread nothing for my safety.
Credit me, that, as in very truth, I have not spilled the red puddle
(which these villagios call the blood) of their most uncivil relation,
so I am under no apprehension whatever for the issue of this
restraint, seeing that it cannot but be harmless to me. Natheless, to
thee, O most Molendinar beauty, I return the thanks which thy courtesy
may justly claim."

"Nay, but, Sir Knight," answered the maiden, in a whisper as low as it
was tremulous, "I deserve no thanks unless you will act by my counsel.
Edward Glendinning hath sent for Dan of the Howlet-hirst, and young
Adie of Aikenshaw, and they are come with three men more, and with
bow, and jack, and spear, and I heard them say to each other, and to
Edward, as they alighted in the court, that they would have amends for
the death of their kinsman, if the monk's cowl should smoke for
it--And the vassals are so wilful now, that the Abbot himself dare not
control them, for fear they turn heretics, and refuse to pay their
feu-duties."

"In faith," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "it may be a shrewd temptation,
and perchance the monks may rid themselves of trouble and cumber, by
handing me over the march to Sir John Foster or Lord Hundson, the
English wardens, and so make peace with their vassals and with England
at once.  Fairest Molinara, I will for once walk by thy rede, and if
thou dost contrive to extricate me from this vile kennel, I will so
celebrate thy wit and beauty, that the Baker's nymph of Raphael
d'Urbino shall seem but a gipsey in comparison of my Molinara."

"I pray you, then, be silent," said the Miller's daughter; "for if your
speech betrays that you are awake, my scheme fails utterly, and it is
Heaven's mercy and Our Lady's that we are not already overheard and
discovered."

"I am silent," replied the Southron, "even as the starless night--but
yet--if this contrivance of thine should endanger thy safety, fair and
no less kind than fair damsel, it were utterly unworthy of me to
accept it at thy hand."

"Do not think of me," said Mysie, hastily; "I am safe--I will take
thought for myself, if I once saw you out of this dangerous
dwelling--if you would provide yourself with any part of your apparel
or goods, lose no time."

The knight _did_, however, lose some time, ere he could settle in
his own mind what to take and what to abandon of his wardrobe, each
article of which seemed endeared to him by recollection of the feasts
and revels at which it had been exhibited. For some little while Mysie
left him to make his selections at leisure, for she herself had also
some preparations to make for flight. But when, returning from the
chamber into which she had retired, with a small bundle in her hand,
she found him still indecisive, she insisted in plain terms, that he
should either make up his baggage for the enterprise, or give it up
entirely. Thus urged, the disconsolate knight hastily made up a few
clothes into a bundle, regarded his trunk-mails with a mute expression
of parting sorrow, and intimated his readiness to wait upon his kind
guide.

She led the way to the door of the apartment, having first carefully
extinguished her lamp, and motioning to the knight to stand close
behind her, tapped once or twice at the door. She was at length
answered by Edward Glendinning, who demanded to know who knocked
within, and what was desired.

"Speak low," said Mysie Happer, "or you will awaken the English
knight. It is I, Mysie Happer, who knock--I wish to get out--you have
locked me up--and I was obliged to wait till the Southron slept."

"Locked you up!" replied Edward, in surprise.

"Yes," answered the Miller's daughter, "you have locked me up into this
room--I was in Mary Avenel's sleeping apartment."

"And can you not remain there till morning," replied Edward, "since it
has so chanced?"

"What!" said the Miller's daughter, in a tone of offended delicacy, "I
remain here a moment longer than I can get out without discovery!--I
would not, for all the Halidome of St. Mary's, remain a minute longer
in the neighbourhood of a man's apartment than I can help it--For
whom, or for what do you hold me? I promise you my father's daughter
has been better brought up than to put in peril her good name."

"Come forth then, and get to thy chamber in silence," said Edward.  So
saying, he undid the bolt. The staircase without was in utter
darkness, as Mysie had before ascertained. So soon as she stept out,
she took hold of Edward as if to support herself, thus interposing her
person betwixt him and Sir Piercie Shaffcon, by whom she was closely
followed. Thus screened from observation, the Englishman slipped past
on tiptoe, unshod and in silence, while the damsel complained to
Edward that she wanted a light.

"I cannot get you a light," said he, "for I cannot leave this post; but
there is a fire below."

"I will sit below till morning," said the Maid of the Mill; and,
tripping down stairs, heard Edward bolt and bar the door of the now
tenantless apartment with vain caution.

At the foot of the stair which she descended, she found the object of
her care waiting her farther directions. She recommended to him the
most absolute silence, which, for once in his life, he seemed not
unwilling to observe, conducted him, with as much caution as if he
were walking on cracked ice, to a dark recess, used for depositing
wood, and instructed him to ensconce himself behind the fagots. She
herself lighted her lamp once more at the kitchen fire, and took her
distaff and spindle, that she might not seem to be unemployed, in case
any one came into the apartment.

From time to time, however, she stole towards the window on tiptoe, to
catch the first glance of the dawn, for the farther prosecution of her
adventurous project. At length she saw, to her great joy, the first
peep of the morning brighten upon the gray clouds of the east, and,
clasping her hands together, thanked Our Lady for the sight, and
implored protection during the remainder of her enterprise. Ere she
had finished her prayer, she started at feeling a man's arm across her
shoulder, while a rough voice spoke in her ear--"What! menseful Mysie
of the Mill so soon at her prayers?--now, benison on the bonny eyes
that open so early!--I'll have a kiss for good morrow's sake."

Dan of the Howlet-hirst, for he was the gallant who paid Mysie this
compliment, suited the action with the word, and the action, as is
usual in such cases of rustic gallantry, was rewarded with a cuff,
which Dan received as a fine gentleman receives a tap with a fan, but
which, delivered by the energetic arm of the Miller's maiden, would
have certainly astonished a less robust gallant.

"How now, Sir Coxcomb!" said she, "and must you be away from your
guard over the English knight, to plague quiet folks with your
horse-tricks!"

"Truly you are mistaken, pretty Mysie," said the clown, "for I have
not yet relieved Edward at his post; and were it not a shame to let
him stay any longer, by my faith, I could find it in my heart not to
quit you these two hours."

"Oh, you have hours and hours enough to see any one," said Mysie; "but
you must think of the distress of the household even now, and get Edward
to sleep for a while, for he has kept watch this whole night."

"I will have another kiss first," answered Dan of the Howlet-hirst.

But Mysie was now on her guard, and, conscious of the vicinity of the
wood-hole, offered such strenuous resistance, that the swain cursed
the nymph's bad humour with very unpastoral phrase and emphasis, and
ran up stairs to relieve the guard of his comrade. Stealing to the
door, she heard the new sentinel hold a brief conversation with
Edward, after which the latter withdrew, and the former entered upon
the duties of his watch.

Mysie suffered him to walk there a little while undisturbed, until the
dawning became more general, by which time she supposed he might have
digested her coyness, and then presenting herself before the watchful
sentinel, demanded of him "the keys of the outer tower, and of the
courtyard gate."

"And for what purpose?" answered the warder.

"To milk the cows, and drive them out to their pasture," said Mysie;
"you would not have the poor beasts kept in the byre a' morning, and
the family in such distress, that there is na ane fit to do a turn but
the byre-woman and myself?"

"And where is the byre-woman?" said Dan.

"Sitting with me in the kitchen, in case these distressed folks want any
thing."

"There are the keys, then, Mysie Dorts," said the sentinel.

"Many thanks, Dan Ne'er-do-weel," answered the Maid of the Mill, and
escaped down stairs in a moment.

To hasten to the wood-hole, and there to robe the English knight in a
short gown and petticoat, which she had provided for the purpose, was
the work of another moment. She then undid the gates of the tower, and
made towards the byre, or cow-house, which stood in one corner of the
courtyard.  Sir Piercie Shafton remonstrated against the delay which
this would occasion.

"Fair and generous Molinara," he said, "had we not better undo the
outward gate, and make the best of our way hence, even like a pair of
sea-mews who make towards shelter of the rocks as the storm waxes
high?"

"We must drive out the cows first," said Mysie, "for a sin it were to
spoil the poor widow's cattle, both for her sake and the poor beasts'
own; and I have no mind any one shall leave the tower in a hurry to
follow us.  Besides, you must have your horse, for you will need a
fleet one ere all be done."

So saying, she locked and double-locked both the inward and outward
door of the tower, proceeded to the cow-house, turned out the cattle,
and, giving the knight his own horse to lead, drove them before her
out at the court-yard gate, intending to return for her own palfrey.
But the noise attending the first operation caught the wakeful
attention of Edward, who, starting to the bartizan, called to know
what the matter was.

Mysie answered with great readiness, that "she was driving out the cows,
for that they would be spoiled for want of looking to."

"I thank thee, kind maiden," said Edward--"and yet," he added, after
a moment's pause, "what damsel is that thou hast with thee?"

Mysie was about to answer, when Sir Piercie Shafton, who apparently
did not desire that the great work of his liberation should be
executed without the interposition of his own ingenuity, exclaimed
from beneath, "I am she, O most bucolical juvenal, under whose charge
are placed the milky mothers of the herd."

"Hell and darkness!" exclaimed Edward, in a transport of fury and
astonishment, "it is Piercie Shafton--What! treason!
treason!--ho!--Dan--Jasper--Martin--the villain escapes!"

"To horse! to horse!" cried Mysie, and in an instant mounted behind
the knight, who was already in the saddle.

Edward caught up a cross-bow, and let fly a bolt, which whistled so
near Mysie's ear, that she called to her companion,--"Spur--spur, Sir
Knight!--the next will not miss us.--Had it been Halbert instead of
Edward who bent that bow, we had been dead."

The knight pressed his horse, which dashed past the cows, and down the
knoll on which the tower was situated. Then taking the road down the
valley, the gallant animal, reckless of its double burden, soon
conveyed them out of hearing of the tumult and alarm with which their
departure filled the Tower of Glendearg.

Thus it strangely happened, that two men were flying in different
directions at the same time, each accused of being the other's murderer.




Chapter the Twenty-Ninth.


  -------------Sure he cannot
  Be so unmanly as to leave me here;
  If he do, maids will not so easily
  Trust men again.
                  THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.

The knight continued to keep the good horse at a pace as quick as the
road permitted, until they had cleared the valley of Glendearg, and
entered upon the broad dale of the Tweed, which now rolled before them
in crystal beauty, displaying on its opposite bank the huge gray
Monastery of St.  Mary's, whose towers and pinnacles were scarce yet
touched by the newly-risen sun, so deeply the edifice lies shrouded
under the mountains which rise to the southward.

Turning to the left, the knight continued his road down to the northern
bank of the river, until they arrived nearly opposite to the weir, or
dam-dike, where Father Philip concluded his extraordinary aquatic
excursion.

Sir Piercie Shafton, whose brain seldom admitted more than one idea at
a time, had hitherto pushed forward without very distinctly
considering where he was going. But the sight of the Monastery so near
to him, reminded, him that he was still on dangerous ground, and that
he must necessarily provide for his safety by choosing some settled
plan of escape. The situation of his guide and deliverer also occurred
to him, for he was far from being either selfish or ungrateful. He
listened, and discovered that the Miller's daughter was sobbing and
weeping bitterly as she rested her head on his shoulder.

"What ails thee," he said, "my generous Molinara?--is there aught that
Piercie Shafton can do which may show his gratitude to his deliverer?"
Mysie pointed with her finger across the river, but ventured not to
turn her eyes in that direction. "Nay, but speak plain, most generous
damsel," said the knight, who, for once, was puzzled as much as his
own elegance of speech was wont to puzzle others, "for I swear to you
that I comprehend nought by the extension of thy fair digit."

"Yonder is my father's house," said Mysie, in a voice interrupted by the
increased burst of her sorrow.

"And I was carrying thee discourteously to a distance from thy
habitation?" said Shafton, imagining he had found out the source of
her grief.  "Wo worth the hour that Piercie Shafton, in attention to
his own safety, neglected the accommodation of any female, far less of
his most beneficent liberatrice! Dismount, then, O lovely Molinara,
unless thou wouldst rather that I should transport thee on horseback
to the house of thy molendinary father, which, if thou sayest the
word, I am prompt to do, defying all dangers which may arise to me
personally, whether by monk or miller."

Mysie suppressed her sobs, and with considerable difficulty muttered
her desire to alight, and take her fortune by herself. Sir Piercie
Shafton, too devoted a squire of dames to consider the most lowly as
exempted from a respectful attention, independent of the claims which
the Miller's maiden possessed over him, dismounted instantly from his
horse, and received in his arms the poor girl, who still wept
bitterly, and, when placed on the ground, seemed scarce able to
support herself, or at least still clung, though, as it appeared,
unconsciously, to the support he had afforded. He carried her to a
weeping birch tree, which grew on the green-sward bank around which
the road winded, and, placing her on the ground beneath it, exhorted
her to compose herself. A strong touch of natural feeling struggled
with, and half overcame, his acquired affectation, while he said,
"Credit me, most generous damsel, the service you have done to Piercie
Shafton he would have deemed too dearly bought, had he foreseen it was
to cost you these tears and singults. Show me the cause of your grief,
and if I can do aught to remove it, believe that the rights you have
acquired over me will make your commands sacred as those of an
empress. Speak, then, fair Molinara, and command him whom fortune hath
rendered at once your debtor and your champion. What are your orders?"

"Only that you will fly and save yourself," said Mysie, mustering up her
utmost efforts to utter these few words.

"Yet," said the knight, "let me not leave you without some token of
remembrance." Mysie would have said there needed none, and most truly
would she have spoken, could she have spoken for weeping. "Piercie
Shafton is poor," he continued, "but let this chain testify he is not
ungrateful to his deliverer."

He took from his neck the rich chain and medallion we have formerly
mentioned, and put it into the powerless hand of the poor maiden, who
neither received nor rejected it, but, occupied with more intense
feelings, seemed scarce aware of what he was doing.

"We shall meet again," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "at least I trust so;
meanwhile, weep no more, fair Molinara, an thou lovest me."

The phrase of conjuration was but used as an ordinary commonplace
expression of the time, but bore a deeper sense to poor Mysie's ear.
She dried her tears; and when the knight, in all kind and chivalrous
courtesy, stooped to embrace her at their parting, she rose humbly up
to receive the proffered honour in a posture of more deference, and
meekly and gratefully accepted the offered salute. Sir Piercie Shafton
mounted his horse, and began to ride off, but curiosity, or perhaps a
stronger feeling, soon induced him to look back, when he beheld the
Miller's daughter standing still motionless on the spot where they had
parted, her eyes turned after him, and the unheeded chain hanging from
her hand.

It was at this moment that a glimpse of the real state of Mysie's
affections, and of the motive from which she had acted in the whole
matter, glanced on Sir Piercie Shafton's mind. The gallants of that
age, disinterested, aspiring, and lofty-minded, even in their
coxcombry, were strangers to those degrading and mischievous pursuits
which are usually termed low amours. They did not "chase the humble
maidens of the plain," or degrade their own rank, to deprive rural
innocence of peace and virtue. It followed, of course, that as
conquests in this class were no part of their ambition, they were in
most cases totally overlooked and unsuspected, left unimproved, as a
modern would call it, where, as on the present occasion, they were
casually made. The companion of Astrophel, and flower of the tilt-yard
of Feliciana, had no more idea that his graces and good parts could
attach the love of Mysie Happer, than a first-rate beauty in the boxes
dreams of the fatal wound which her charms may inflict on some
attorney's romantic apprentice in the pit. I suppose, in any ordinary
case, the pride of rank and distinction would have pronounced on the
humble admirer the doom which Beau Fielding denounced against the
whole female world, "Let them look and die;" but the obligations under
which he lay to the enamoured maiden, miller's daughter as she was,
precluded the possibility of Sir Piercie's treating the matter _en
cavalier_, and, much embarrassed, yet a little flattered at the
same time, he rode back to try what could be done for the damsel's
relief.

The innate modesty of poor Mysie could not prevent her showing too
obvious signs of joy at Sir Piercie Shafton's return. She was betrayed
by the sparkle of the rekindling eye, and a caress which, however
timidly bestowed, she could not help giving to the neck of the horse
which brought back the beloved rider.

"What farther can I do for you, kind Molinara?" said Sir Piercie
Shafton, himself hesitating and blushing; for, to the grace of Queen
Bess's age be it spoken, her courtiers wore more iron on their breasts
than brass on their foreheads, and even amid their vanities preserved
still the decaying spirit of chivalry, which inspired of yore the very
gentle Knight of Chaucer,

     Who in his port was modest as a maid.

Mysie blushed deeply, with her eyes fixed on the ground, and Sir Piercie
proceeded in the same tone of embarrassed kindness. "Are you afraid to
return home alone, my kind Molinara?--would you that I should
accompany you?"

"Alas!" said Mysie, looking up, and her cheek changing from scarlet to
pale, "I have no home left."

"How! no home!" said Shafton; "says my generous Molinara she hath no
home, when yonder stands the house of her father, and but a crystal
stream between?"


"Alas!" answered the Miller's maiden, "I have no longer either home
or father. He is a devoted servant to the Abbey--I have offended the
Abbot, and if I return home my father will kill me."

"He dare not injure thee, by Heaven!" said Sir Piercie; "I swear to
thee, by my honour and knighthood, that the forces of my cousin of
Northumberland shall lay the Monastery so flat, that a horse shall not
stumble as he rides over it, if they should dare to injure a hair of
your head! Therefore be hopeful and content, kind Mysinda, and know
you have obliged one who can and will avenge the slightest wrong
offered to you."

He sprung from his horse as he spoke, and, in the animation of his
argument, grasped the willing hand of Mysie, (or Mysinda as he had now
christened her.) He gazed too upon full black eyes, fixed upon his own
with an expression which, however subdued by maidenly shame, it was
impossible to mistake, on cheeks where something like hope began to
restore the natural colour, and on two lips which, like double
rosebuds, were kept a little apart by expectation, and showed within a
line of teeth as white as pearl. All this was dangerous to look upon,
and Sir. Piercie Shafton, after repeating with less and less force his
request that the fair Mysinda would allow him to carry her to her
father's, ended by asking the fair Mysinda to go along with him--"At
least," he added, "until I shall be able to conduct you to a place of
safety."

Mysie Happer made no answer; but blushing scarlet betwixt joy and
shame, mutely expressed her willingness to accompany the Southron
Knight, by knitting her bundle closer, and preparing to resume her
seat _en croupe_. "And what is your pleasure that I should do
with this?" she said, holding up the chain as if she had been for the
first time aware that it was in her hand.

"Keep it, fairest Mysinda, for my sake," said the Knight.

"Not so, sir," answered Mysie, gravely; "the maidens of my country
take no such gifts from their superiors, and I need no token to remind
me of this morning."

Most earnestly and courteously did the Knight urge her acceptance of
the proposed guerdon, but on this point Mysie was resolute; feeling,
perhaps, that to accept of any thing bearing the appearance of reward,
would be to place the service she had rendered him on a mercenary
footing. In short, she would only agree to conceal the chain, lest it
might prove the means of detecting the owner, until Sir Piercie should
be placed in perfect safety.

They mounted and resumed their journey, of which Mysie, as bold and
sharp-witted in some points as she was simple and susceptible in
others, now took in some degree the direction, having only inquired
its general destination, and learned that Sir Piercie Shafton desired
to go to Edinburgh, where he hoped to find friends and protection.
Possessed of this information, Mysie availed herself of her local
knowledge to get as soon as possible out of the bounds of the
Halidome, and into those of a temporal baron, supposed to be addicted
to the reformed doctrines, and upon whose limits, at least, she
thought their pursuers would not attempt to hazard any violence.  She
was not indeed very apprehensive of a pursuit, reckoning with some
confidence that the inhabitants of the Tower of Glendearg would find
it a matter of difficulty to surmount the obstacles arising from their
own bolts and bars, with which she had carefully secured them before
setting forth on the retreat.

They journeyed on, therefore, in tolerable security, and Sir Piercie
Shafton found leisure to amuse the time in high-flown speeches and
long anecdotes of the court of Feliciana, to which Mysie bent an ear
not a whit less attentive, that she did not understand one word out of
three which was uttered by her fellow-traveller. She listened,
however, and admired upon trust, as many a wise man has been contented
to treat the conversation of a handsome but silly mistress. As for Sir
Piercie, he was in his element; and, well assured of the interest and
full approbation of his auditor, he went on spouting Euphuism of more
than usual obscurity, and at more than usual length. Thus passed the
morning, and noon brought them within sight of a winding stream, on
the side of which arose an ancient baronial castle, surrounded by some
large trees. At a small distance from the gate of the mansion,
extended, as in those days was usual, a straggling hamlet, having a
church in the centre.

"There are two hostelries in this Kirk-town," said Mysie, "but the
worst is best for our purpose; for it stands apart from the other
houses, and I ken the man weel, for he has dealt with my father for
malt."

This _causa scientiae_, to use a lawyer's phrase, was ill chosen
for Mysie's purpose; for Sir Piercie Shafton had, by dint of his own
loquacity, been talking himself all this while into a high esteem for
his fellow-traveller, and, pleased with the gracious reception which
she afforded to his powers of conversation, had well-nigh forgotten
that she was not herself one of those high-born beauties of whom he
was recounting so many stories, when this unlucky speech at once
placed the most disadvantageous circumstances attending her lineage
under his immediate recollection. He said nothing, however. What
indeed could he say? Nothing was so natural as that a miller's
daughter should be acquainted with publicans who dealt with her father
for malt, and all that was to be wondered at was the concurrence of
events which had rendered such a female the companion and guide of Sir
Piercie Shafton of Wilverton, kinsman of the great Earl of
Northumberland, whom princes and sovereigns themselves termed cousin,
because of the Piercie blood. [Footnote: Froissart tells us somewhere,
(the readers of romances are indifferent to accurate reference,) that
the King of France called one of the Piercies cousin, because of the
blood of Northumberland.] He felt the disgrace of strolling through
the country with a miller's maiden on the crupper behind him, and was
even ungrateful enough to feel some emotions of shame, when he halted
his horse at the door of the little inn.

But the alert intelligence of Mysie Happer spared him farther sense of
derogation, by instantly springing from his horse, and cramming the
ears of mine host, who came out with his mouth agape to receive a
guest of the knight's appearance, with an imagined tale, in which
circumstance on circumstance were huddled so fast, as to astonish Sir
Piercie Shafton, whose own invention was none of the most brilliant.
She explained to the publican that this was a great English knight
travelling from the Monastery to the court of Scotland, after having
paid his vows to Saint Mary, and that she had been directed to conduct
him so far on the road; and that Ball, her palfrey, had fallen by the
way, because he had been over-wrought with carrying home the last
melder of meal to the portioner of Langhope; and that she had turned
in Ball to graze in the Tasker's park, near Cripplecross, for he had
stood as still as Lot's wife with very weariness; and that the knight
had courteously insisted she should ride behind him, and that she had
brought him to her kend friend's hostelry rather than to proud Peter
Peddie's, who got his malt at the Mellerstane mills; and that he must
get the best that the house afforded, and that he must get it ready in
a moment of time, and that she was ready to help in the kitchen.

All this ran glibly off the tongue without pause on the part of Mysie
Happer, or doubt on that of the landlord. The guest's horse was
conducted to the stable, and he himself installed in the cleanest
corner and best seat which the place afforded. Mysie, ever active and
officious, was at once engaged in preparing food, in spreading the
table, and in making all the better arrangements which her experience
could suggest, for the honour and comfort of her companion. He would
fain have resisted this; for while it was impossible not to be
gratified with the eager and alert kindness which was so active in his
service, he felt an undefinable pain in seeing Mysinda engaged in
these menial services, and discharging them, moreover, as one to whom
they were but too familiar. Yet this jarring feeling was mixed with,
and perhaps balanced by, the extreme grace with which the neat-handed
maiden executed these tasks, however mean in themselves, and gave to
the wretched corner of a miserable inn of the period, the air of a
bower, in which an enamoured fairy, or at least a shepherdess of
Arcadia, was displaying, with unavailing solicitude, her designs on
the heart of some knight, destined by fortune to higher thoughts, and
a more splendid union.

The lightness and grace with which Mysie covered the little round
table with a snow-white cloth, and arranged upon it the
hastily-roasted capon, with its accompanying stoup of Bourdeaux, were
but plebeian graces in themselves; but yet there were very flattering
ideas excited by each glance.  She was so very well made, agile at
once and graceful, with her hand and arm as white as snow, and her
face in which a smile contended with a blush, and her eyes which
looked ever at Shafton when he looked elsewhere, and were dropped at
once when they encountered his, that she was irresistible!  In fine,
the affectionate delicacy of her whole demeanour, joined to the
promptitude and boldness she had so lately evinced, tended to ennoble
the services she had rendered, as if some

  -----sweet engaging Grace
  Put on some clothes to come abroad,
    And took a waiter's place.

But, on the other hand, came the damning reflection, that these duties
were not taught her by Love, to serve the beloved only, but arose from
the ordinary and natural habits of a miller's daughter, accustomed,
doubtless, to render the same service to every wealthier churl who
frequented her father's mill. This stopped the mouth of vanity, and of
the love which vanity had been hatching, as effectually as a peck of
literal flour would have done.

Amidst this variety of emotions, Sir Piercie Shafton forgot not to ask
the object of them to sit down and partake the good cheer which she
had been so anxious to provide and to place in order. He expected that
this invitation would have been bashfully, perhaps, but certainly most
thankfully, accepted; but he was partly flattered, and partly piqued,
by the mixture of deference and resolution with which Mysie declined
his invitation. Immediately after, she vanished from the apartment,
leaving the Euphuist to consider whether he was most gratified or
displeased by her disappearance.

In fact, this was a point on which he would have found it difficult to
make up his mind, had there been any necessity for it. As there was
none, he drank a few cups of claret, and sang (to himself) a strophe
or two of the canzonettes of the divine Astrophel. But in spite both
of wine and of Sir Philip Sidney, the connexion in which he now stood,
and that which he was in future to hold, with the lovely Molinara, or
Mysinda, as he had been pleased to denominate Mysie Happer, recurred
to his mind. The fashion of the times (as we have already noticed)
fortunately coincided with his own natural generosity of disposition,
which indeed amounted almost to extravagance, in prohibiting, as a
deadly sin, alike against gallantry, chivalry, and morality, his
rewarding the good offices he had received from this poor maiden, by
abusing any of the advantages which her confidence in his honour had
afforded. To do Sir Piercie justice, it was an idea which never
entered into his head; and he would probably have dealt the most
scientific _imbroccata, stoccata_, or _punto reverso_, which
the school of Vincent Saviola had taught him, to any man who had dared
to suggest to him such selfish and ungrateful meanness. On the other
hand, he was a man, and foresaw various circumstances which might
render their journey together in this intimate fashion a scandal and a
snare. Moreover, he was a coxcomb and a courtier, and felt there was
something ridiculous in travelling the land with a miller's daughter
behind his saddle, giving rise to suspicions not very creditable to
either, and to ludicrous constructions, so far as he himself was
concerned.

"I would," he said half aloud, "that if such might be done without
harm or discredit to the too-ambitious, yet too-well-distinguishing
Molinara, she and I were fairly severed, and bound on our different
courses; even as we see the goodly vessel bound for the distant seas
hoist sails and bear away into the deep, while the humble fly-boat
carries to shore those friends, who, with wounded hearts and watery
eyes, have committed to their higher destinies the more daring
adventurers by whom the fair frigate is manned."

He had scarce uttered the wish when it was gratified; for the host
entered to say that his worshipful knighthood's horse was ready to be
brought forth as he had desired; and on his inquiry for "the--the
damsel--that is--the young woman--"

"Mysie Happer," said the landlord, "has returned to her father's; but
she bade me say, you could not miss the road for Edinburgh, in respect
it was neither far way nor foul gate."

It is seldom we are exactly blessed with the precise fulfilment of our
wishes at the moment when we utter them; perhaps, because Heaven
wisely withholds what, if granted, would be often received with
ingratitude.  So at least it chanced in the present instance; for when
mine host said that Mysie was returned homeward, the knight was
tempted to reply, with an ejaculation of surprise and vexation, and a
hasty demand, whither and when she had departed? The first emotions
his prudence suppressed, the second found utterance.

"Where is she gane?" said the host, gazing on him, and repeating his
question--"She is gane hame to her father's, it is like--and she gaed
just when she gave orders about your worship's horse, and saw it well
fed, (she might have trusted me, but millers and millers' kin think a'
body as thief-like as themselves,) an' she's three miles on the gate
by this time."

"Is she gone then?" muttered Sir Piercie, making two or three hasty
strides through the narrow apartment--"Is she gone?--Well, then, let
her go. She could have had but disgrace by abiding by me, and I little
credit by her society. That I should have thought there was such
difficulty in shaking her off! I warrant she is by this time laughing
with some clown she has encountered; and my rich chain will prove a
good dowry.--And ought it not to prove so? and has she not deserved
it, were it ten times more valuable?--Piercie Shafton! Piercie
Shafton! dost thou grudge thy deliverer the guerdon she hath so dearly
won? The selfish air of this northern land hath infected thee, Piercie
Shafton! and blighted the blossoms of thy generosity, even as it is
said to shrivel the flowers of the mulberry.--Yet I thought," he
added, after a moment's pause, "that she would not so easily and
voluntarily have parted from me. But it skills not thinking of
it.--Cast my reckoning, mine host, and let your groom lead forth my
nag."

The good host seemed also to have some mental point to discuss, for he
answered not instantly, debating perhaps whether his conscience would
bear a double charge for the same guests. Apparently his conscience
replied in the negative, though not without hesitation, for he at
length replied--"It's daffing to lee; it winna deny that the lawing is
clean paid. Ne'ertheless, if your worshipful knighthood pleases to
give aught for increase of trouble--"

"How!" said the knight; "the reckoning paid? and by whom, I pray
you?"

"E'en by Mysie Happer, if truth maun be spoken, as I said before,"
answered the honest landlord, with as many compunctious visitings for
telling the verity as another might have felt for making a lie in the
circumstances--"And out of the moneys supplied for your honour's
journey by the Abbot, as she tauld to me. And laith were I to
surcharge any gentleman that darkens my doors." He added in the
confidence of honesty which his frank avowal entitled him to
entertain, "Nevertheless, as I said before, if it pleases your
knighthood of free good-will to consider extraordinary trouble--"

The knight cut short his argument, by throwing the landlord a
rose-noble, which probably doubled the value of a Scottish reckoning,
though it would have defrayed but a half one at the Three Cranes or
the Vintry. The bounty so much delighted mine host, that he ran to
fill the stirrup-cup (for which no charge was ever made) from a butt
yet charier than that which he had pierced for the former stoup. The
knight paced slowly to horse, partook of his courtesy, and thanked him
with the stiff condescension of the court of Elizabeth; then mounted
and followed the northern path, which was pointed out as the nearest
to Edinburgh, and which, though very unlike a modern highway, bore yet
so distinct a resemblance to a public and frequented road as not to be
easily mistaken.

"I shall not need her guidance it seems," said he to himself, as he
rode slowly onward; "and I suppose that was one reason of her abrupt
departure, so different from what one might have expected.--Well, I
am well rid of her. Do we not pray to be liberated from temptation?
Yet that she should have erred so much in estimation of her own
situation and mine, as to think of defraying the reckoning! I would I
saw her once more, but to explain to her the solecism of which her
inexperience hath rendered her guilty. And I fear," he added, as he
emerged from some straggling trees, and looked out upon a wild moorish
country, composed of a succession of swelling lumpish hills, "I fear I
shall soon want the aid of this Ariadne, who might afford me a clew
through the recesses of yonder mountainous labyrinth."

As the Knight thus communed with himself, his attention was caught by
the sound of a horse's footsteps; and a lad, mounted on a little gray
Scottish nag, about fourteen hands high, coming along a path which led
from behind the trees, joined him on the high-road, if it could be
termed such.  The dress of the lad was completely in village fashion,
yet neat and handsome in appearance. He had a jerkin of gray cloth
slashed and trimmed, with black hose of the same, with deer-skin
rullions or sandals, and handsome silver spurs. A cloak of a dark
mulberry colour was closely drawn round the upper part of his person,
and the cape in part muffled his face, which was also obscured by his
bonnet of black velvet cloth, and its little plume of feathers.

Sir Piercie Shafton, fond of society, desirous also to have a guide,
and, moreover, prepossessed in favour of so handsome a youth, failed
not to ask him whence he came, and whither he was going. The youth
looked another way, as he answered, that he was going to Edinburgh,
"to seek service in some nobleman's family."

"I fear me you have run away from your last master," said Sir Piercie,
"since you dare not look me in the face while you answer my question."

"Indeed, sir, I have not," answered the lad, bashfully, while, as if
with reluctance, he turned round his face, and instantly withdrew it.
It was a glance, but the discovery was complete. There was no
mistaking the dark full eye, the cheek in which much embarrassment
could not altogether disguise an expression of comic humour, and the
whole figure at once betrayed, under her metamorphosis, the Maid of
the Mill. The recognition was joyful, and Sir Piercie Shafton was too
much pleased to have regained his companion to remember the very
good reasons which had consoled him for losing her.

To his questions respecting her dress, she answered that she had
obtained it in the Kirktown from a friend; it was the holiday suit of
a son of hers, who had taken the field with his liege-lord, the baron
of the land.  She had borrowed the suit under pretence she meant to
play in some mumming or rural masquerade. She had left, she said, her
own apparel in exchange, which was better worth ten crowns than this
was worth four.

"And the nag, my ingenious Molinara," said Sir Piercie, "whence comes
the nag?"

"I borrowed him from our host at the Gled's-Nest," she replied; and
added, half stifling a laugh, "he has sent to get, instead of it, our
Ball, which I left in the Tasker's Park at Cripplecross. He will be
lucky if he find it there."

"But then the poor man will lose his horse, most argute Mysinda," said
Sir Piercie Shafton, whose English notions of property were a little
startled at a mode of acquisition more congenial to the ideas of a
miller's daughter (and he a Border miller to boot) than with those of
an English person of quality.

"And if he does lose his horse," said Mysie, laughing, "surely he is
not the first man on the marches who has had such a mischance. But he
will be no loser, for I warrant he will stop the value out of moneys
which he has owed my father this many a day."

"But then your father will be the loser," objected yet again the
pertinacious uprightness of Sir Piercie Shafton.

"What signifies it now to talk of my father?" said the damsel,
pettishly; then instantly changing to a tone of deep feeling, she
added, "my father has this day lost that which will make him hold
light the loss of all the gear he has left."

Struck with the accents of remorseful sorrow in which his companion
uttered these few words, the English knight felt himself bound both in
honour and conscience to expostulate with her as strongly as he could,
on the risk of the step which she had now taken, and on the propriety
of her returning to her father's house. The matter of his discourse,
though adorned with many unnecessary flourishes, was honourable both
to his head and heart.

The Maid of the Mill listened to his flowing periods with her head
sunk on her bosom as she rode, like one in deep thought or deeper
sorrow. When he had finished, she raised up her countenance, looked
full on the knight, and replied with great firmness--"If you are weary
of my company, Sir Piercie Shafton, you have but to say so, and the
Miller's daughter will be no farther cumber to you. And do not think I
will be a burden to you, if we travel together to Edinburgh; I have
wit enough and pride enough to be a willing burden to no man. But if
you reject not my company at present, and fear not it will be
burdensome to you hereafter, speak no more to me of returning back.
All that you can say to me I have said to myself; and that I am now
here, is a sign that I have said it to no purpose. Let this subject,
therefore, be forever ended betwixt us. I have already, in some small
fashion, been useful to you, and the time may come I may be more so;
for this is not your land of England, where men say justice is done
with little fear or favour to great and to small; but it is a land
where men do by the strong hand, and defend by the ready wit, and I
know better than you the perils you are exposed to."

Sir Piercie Shafton was somewhat mortified to find that the damsel
conceived her presence useful to him as a protectress as well as
guide, and said something of seeking protection of nought save his own
arm and his good sword. Mysie answered very quietly, that she nothing
doubted his bravery; but it was that very quality of bravery which was
most likely to involve him in danger. Sir Piercie Shafton, whose head
never kept very long in any continued train of thinking, acquiesced
without much reply, resolving in his own mind that the maiden only
used this apology to disguise her real motive, of affection to his
person. The romance of the situation flattered his vanity and elevated
his imagination, as placing him in the situation of one of those
romantic heroes of whom he had read the histories, where similar
transformations made a distinguished figure.

He took many a sidelong glance at his page, whose habits of country
sport and country exercise had rendered her quite adequate to sustain
the character she had assumed. She managed the little nag with
dexterity, and even with grace; nor did any thing appear that could
have betrayed her disguise, except when a bashful consciousness of her
companion's eye being fixed on her, gave her an appearance of
temporary embarrassment, which greatly added to her beauty.

The couple rode forward as in the morning, pleased with themselves and
with each other, until they arrived at the village where they were to
repose for the night, and where all the inhabitants of the little inn,
both male and female, joined in extolling the good grace and handsome
countenance of the English knight, and the uncommon beauty of his
youthful attendant.

It was here that Mysie Happer first made Sir Piercie Shafton sensible
of the reserved manner in which she proposed to live with him. She
announced him as her master, and, waiting upon him with the reverent
demeanour of an actual domestic, permitted not the least approach to
familiarity, not even such as the knight might with the utmost
innocence have ventured upon.  For example, Sir Piercie, who, as we
know, was a great connoisseur in dress, was detailing to her the
advantageous change which he proposed to make in her attire as soon as
they should reach Edinburgh, by arraying her in his own colours of
pink and carnation. Mysie Happer listened with great complacency to
the unction with which he dilated upon welts, laces, slashes, and
trimmings, until, carried away by the enthusiasm with which he was
asserting the superiority of the falling band over the Spanish ruff,
he approached his hand, in the way of illustration, towards the collar
of his page's doublet. She instantly stepped back and gravely reminded
him that she was alone and under his protection.

"You cannot but remember the cause which has brought me here," she
continued; "make the least approach to any familiarity which you would
not offer to a princess surrounded by her court, and you have seen the
last of the Miller's daughter--She will vanish as the chaff disappears
from the shieling-hill [Footnote: The place where corn was winnowed,
while that operation was performed by the hand, was called in Scotland
the Shieling-hill.] when the west wind blows."

"I do protest, fair Molinara," said Sir Piercie Shafton--but the fair
Molinara had disappeared before his protest could be uttered. "A most
singular wench," said he to himself; "and by this hand, as discreet as
she is fair-featured--Certes, shame it were to offer her scathe or
dishonour!  She makes similes too, though somewhat savouring of her
condition. Had she but read Euphues, and forgotten that accursed mill
and shieling-hill, it is my thought that her converse would be
broidered with as many and as choice pearls of compliment, as that of
the most rhetorical lady in the court of Feliciana. I trust she means
to return to bear me company."

But that was no part of Mysie's prudential scheme. It was then drawing
to dusk, and he saw her not again until the next morning, when the
horses were brought to the door that they might prosecute their
journey.

But our story here necessarily leaves the English knight and his page,
to return to the Tower of Glendearg.




Chapter the Thirtieth.


  You call it an ill angel it may be so,
  But sure I am, among the ranks which fell,
  'Tis the first fiend e'er counsell'd man to rise,
  And win the bliss the sprite himself had forfeited.
                             OLD PLAY.

We must resume our narrative at the period when Mary Avenel was
conveyed to the apartment which had been formerly occupied by the two
Glendinnings, and when her faithful attendant, Tibbie, had exhausted
herself in useless attempts to compose and to comfort her. Father
Eustace also dealt forth with well-meant kindness those apophthegms
and dogmata of consolation, which friendship almost always offers to
grief, though they are uniformly offered in vain. She was at length
left to indulge in the desolation of her own sorrowful feelings. She
felt as those who, loving for the first time, have lost what they
loved, before time and repeated calamity have taught them that every
loss is to a certain extent reparable or endurable.

Such grief may be conceived better than it can be described, as is
well known to those who have experienced it. But Mary Avenel had been
taught by the peculiarity of her situation, to regard herself as the
Child of Destiny; and the melancholy and reflecting turn of her
disposition gave to her sorrows a depth and breadth peculiar to her
character. The grave--and it was a bloody grave--had closed, as she
believed, over the youth to whom she was secretly, but most warmly
attached; the force and ardour of Halbert's character bearing a
singular correspondence to the energy of which her own was capable.
Her sorrow did not exhaust itself in sighs and tears, but when the
first shock had passed away, concentrated itself with deep and steady
meditation, to collect and calculate, like a bankrupt debtor, the full
amount of her loss. It seemed as if all that connected her with earth,
had vanished with this broken tie. She had never dared to anticipate
the probability of an ultimate union with Halbert, yet now his
supposed fall seemed that of the only tree which was to shelter her
from the storm. She respected the more gentle character, and more
peaceful attainments, of the younger Glendinning; but it had not
escaped her (what never indeed escaped woman in such circumstances)
that he was disposed to place himself in competition with what she,
the daughter of a proud and warlike race, deemed the more manly
qualities of his elder brother; and there is no time when a woman does
so little justice to the character of a surviving lover, as when
comparing him with the preferred rival of whom she has been recently
deprived.

The motherly, but coarse kindness of Dame Glendinning, and the doating
fondness of her old domestic, seemed now the only kind feeling of
which she formed the object; and she could not but reflect how little
these were to be compared with the devoted attachment of a high-souled
youth, whom the least glance of her eye could command, as the
high-mettled steed is governed by the bridle of the rider. It was when
plunged among these desolating reflections, that Mary Avenel felt the
void of mind, arising from the narrow and bigoted ignorance in which
Rome then educated the children of her church. Their whole religion
was a ritual, and their prayers were the formal iteration of unknown
words, which, in the hour of affliction, could yield but little
consolation to those who from habit resorted to them. Unused to the
practice of mental devotion, and of personal approach to the Divine
Presence by prayer, she could not help exclaiming in her distress,
"There is no aid for me on earth, and I know not how to ask it from
Heaven!"

As she spoke thus in an agony of sorrow, she cast her eyes into the
apartment, and saw the mysterious Spirit, which waited upon the
fortunes of her house, standing in the moonlight in the midst of the
room. The same form, as the reader knows, had more than once offered
itself to her sight; and either her native boldness of mind, or some
peculiarity attached to her from her birth, made her now look upon it
without shrinking. But the White Lady of Avenel was now more
distinctly visible, and more closely present, than she had ever before
seemed to be, and Mary was appalled by her presence. She would,
however, have spoken; but there ran a tradition, that though others
who had seen the White Lady had asked questions and received answers,
yet those of the house of Avenel who had ventured to speak to her, had
never long survived the colloquy. The figure, besides, as sitting up
in her bed, Mary Avenel gazed on it intently, seemed by its gestures
to caution her to keep silence, and at the same time to bespeak
attention.

The White Lady then seemed to press one of the planks of the floor
with her foot, while, in her usual low, melancholy, and musical chant,
she repeated the following verses:

  "Maiden, whose sorrows wail the Living Dead,
    Whose eyes shall commune with the Dead Alive,
  Maiden, attend! Beneath my foot lies hid
    The Word, the Law, the Path, which thou dost strive
  To find and canst not find.--Could spirits shed
    Tears for their lot, it were my lot to weep,
  Showing the road which I shall never tread,
    Though my foot points it.--Sleep, eternal sleep,
  Dark, long, and cold forgetfulness my lot!--
    But do not thou at human ills repine,
  Secure there lies full guerdon in this spot
    For all the woes that wait frail Adam's line--
  Stoop, then, and make it yours--I may not make it mine!"

The phantom stooped towards the floor as she concluded, as if with the
intention of laying her hand on the board on which she stood. But ere
she had completed that gesture, her form became indistinct, was
presently only like the shade of a fleecy cloud, which passed betwixt
earth and the moon, and was soon altogether invisible.

A strong impression of fear, the first which she had experienced in
her life to any agitating extent, seized upon the mind of Mary Avenel,
and for a minute she felt a disposition to faint. She repelled it,
however, mustered her courage, and addressed herself to saints and
angels, as her church recommended. Broken slumbers at length stole on
her exhausted mind and frame, and she slept until the dawn was about
to rise, when she was awakened by the cry of "Treason! treason!
follow, follow!" which arose in the tower, when it was found that
Piercie Shafton had made his escape.

Apprehensive of some new misfortune, Mary Avenel hastily arranged the
dress which she had not laid aside, and, venturing to quit her
chamber, learned from Tibb, who, with her gray hairs dishevelled like
those of a sibyl, was flying from room to room, that the bloody
Southron villain had made his escape, and that Halbert Glendinning,
poor bairn, would sleep unrevenged and unquiet in his bloody grave. In
the lower apartments, the young men were roaring like thunder, and
venting in oaths and exclamations against the fugitives the rage which
they experienced in finding themselves locked up within the tower, and
debarred from their vindictive pursuit by the wily precautions of
Mysie Happer. The authoritative voice of the Sub-Prior commanding
silence was next heard; upon which Mary Avenel, whose tone of feeling
did not lead her to enter into counsel or society with the rest of the
party, again retired to her solitary chamber.

The rest of the family held counsel in the spence, Edward almost
beside himself with rage, and the Sub-Prior in no small degree
offended at the effrontery of Mysie Happer in attempting such a
scheme, as well as at the mingled boldness and dexterity with which it
had been executed. But neither surprise nor anger availed aught. The
windows, well secured with iron bars for keeping assailants out,
proved now as effectual for detaining the inhabitants within. The
battlements were open, indeed; but without ladder or ropes to act as a
substitute for wings, there was no possibility of descending from
them. They easily succeeded in alarming the inhabitants of the
cottages beyond the precincts of the court; but the men had been
called in to strengthen the guard for the night, and only women and
children remained who could contribute nothing in the emergency,
except their useless exclamations of surprise, and there were no
neighbours for miles around. Dame Elspeth, however, though drowned in
tears, was not so unmindful of external affairs, but that she could
find voice enough to tell the women and children without, to "leave
their skirling, and look after the cows that she couldna get minded,
what wi' the awfu' distraction of her mind, what wi' that fause slut
having locked them up in their ain tower as fast as if they had been
in the Jeddart tolbooth."

Meanwhile, the men finding other modes of exit impossible, unanimously
concluded to force the doors with such tools as the house afforded for
the purpose. These were not very proper for the occasion, and the
strength of the doors was great. The interior one, formed of oak,
occupied them for three mortal hours, and there was little prospect of
the iron door being forced in double the time.

While they were engaged in this ungrateful toil, Mary Avenel had with
much less labour acquired exact knowledge of what the Spirit had
intimated in her mystic rhyme. On examining the spot which the phantom
had indicated by her gestures, it was not difficult to discover that a
board had been loosened, which might be raised at pleasure. On
removing this piece of plank, Mary Avenel was astonished to find the
Black Book, well remembered by her as her mother's favourite study, of
which she immediately took possession, with as much joy as her present
situation rendered her capable of feeling.

Ignorant in a great measure of its contents, Mary Avenel had been
taught from her infancy to hold this volume in sacred veneration. It
is probable that the deceased Lady of Walter Avenel only postponed
initiating her daughter into the mysteries of the Divine Word, until
she should be better able to comprehend both the lessons which it
taught, and the risk at which, in those times, they were studied.
Death interposed, and removed her before the times became favourable
to the reformers, and before her daughter was so far advanced in age
as to be fit to receive religious instruction of this deep import. But
the affectionate mother had made preparations for the earthly work
which she had most at heart. There were slips of paper inserted in the
volume, in which, by an appeal to, and a comparison of, various
passages in holy writ, the errors and human inventions with which the
Church of Rome had defaced the simple edifice of Christianity, as
erected by its divine architect, were pointed out. These controversial
topics were treated with a spirit of calmness and Christian charity,
which might have been an example to the theologians of the period; but
they were clearly, fairly, and plainly argued, and supported by the
necessary proofs and references. Other papers there were which had no
reference whatever to polemics, but were the simple effusions of a
devout mind communing with itself. Among these was one frequently
used, as it seemed from the state of the manuscript, on which the
mother of Mary had transcribed and placed together those affecting
texts to which the heart has recourse, in affliction, and which
assures us at once of the sympathy and protection afforded to the
children of the promise. In Mary Avenel's state of mind, these
attracted her above all the other lessons, which, coming from a hand
so dear, had reached her at a time so critical, and in a manner so
touching.  She read the affecting promise, "I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee," and the consoling exhortation, "Call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee." She read them, and her heart
acquiesced in the conclusion. Surely this is the word of God!

There are those to whom a sense of religion has come in storm and
tempest; there are those whom it has summoned amid scenes of revelry
and idle vanity; there are those, too, who have heard its "still small
voice" amid rural leisure and placid contentment. But perhaps the
knowledge which causeth not to err, is most frequently impressed upon
the mind during seasons of affliction; and tears are the softened
showers which cause the seed of Heaven to spring and take root in the
human breast. At least it was thus with Mary Avenel. She was
insensible to the discordant noise which rang below, the clang of bars
and the jarring symphony of the levers which they used to force them,
the measured shouts of the labouring inmates as they combined their
strength for each heave, and gave time with their voices to the
exertion of their arms, and their deeply muttered vows of revenge on
the fugitives who had bequeathed them at their departure a task so
toilsome and difficult. Not all this din, combined in hideous concert,
and expressive of aught but peace, love, and forgiveness, could divert
Mary Avenel from the new course of study on which she had so
singularly entered. "The serenity of Heaven," she said, "is above me;
the sounds which are around are but those of earth and earthly
passion."

Meanwhile the noon was passed, and little impression was made on the
iron grate, when they who laboured at it received a sudden
reinforcement by the unexpected arrival of Christie of the Clinthill.
He came at the head of a small party, consisting of four horsemen, who
bore in their caps the sprig of holly, which was the badge of Avenel.

"What, ho !--my masters," he said, "I bring you a prisoner."

"You had better have brought us liberty," said Dan of the
Howlet-hirst.

Christie looked at the state of affairs with great surprise. "An I
were to be hanged for it," he said, "as I may for as little a matter,
I could not forbear laughing at seeing men peeping through their own
bars like so many rats in a rat-trap, and he with the beard behind,
like the oldest rat in the cellar."

"Hush, thou unmannered knave," said Edward, "it is the Sub-Prior;
and this is neither time, place, nor company, for your ruffian jests."

"What, ho! is my young master malapert?" said Christie; "why, man,
were he my own carnal father, instead of being father to half the
world, I would have my laugh out. And now it is over, I must assist
you, I reckon, for you are setting very greenly about this gear--put
the pinch nearer the staple, man, and hand me an iron crow through the
grate, for that's the fowl to fly away with a wicket on its shoulders.
I have broke into as many grates as you have teeth in your young
head--ay, and broke out of them too, as the captain of the Castle of
Lochmaben knows full well."

Christie did not boast more skill than he really possessed; for,
applying their combined strength, under the direction of that
experienced engineer, bolt and staple gave way before them, and in
less than half an hour, the grate, which had so long repelled their
force, stood open before them.

"And now," said Edward, "to horse, my mates, and pursue the villain
Shafton!"

"Halt, there," said Christie of the Clinthill; "pursue your guest, my
master's friend and my own?--there go two words to that bargain. What
the foul fiend would you pursue him for?"

"Let me pass," said Edward, vehemently, "I will be staid by no
man--the villain has murdered my brother!"

"What says he?" said Christie, turning to the others; "murdered? who
is murdered, and by whom?"

"The Englishman, Sir Piercie Shafton," said Dan of the Howlet-hirst,
"has murdered young Halbert Glendinning yesterday morning, and we
have all risen to the fray."

"It is a bedlam business, I think," said Christie. "First I find you
all locked up in your own tower, and next I am come to prevent you
revenging a murder that was never committed!"

"I tell you," said Edward, "that my brother was slain and buried
yesterday morning by this false Englishman."

"And I tell you," answered Christie, "that I saw him alive and well
last night. I would I knew his trick of getting out of the grave; most
men find it more hard to break through a green sod than a grated
door."

Every body now paused, and looked on Christie in astonishment, until the
Sub-Prior, who had hitherto avoided communication with him, came up and
required earnestly to know, whether he meant really to maintain that
Halbert Glendinning lived.

"Father," he said, with, more respect than he usually showed to any
one save his master, "I confess I may sometimes jest with those of
your coat, but not with you; because, as you may partly recollect, I
owe you a life.  It is certain as the sun is in heaven, that Halbert
Glendinning supped at the house of my master the Baron of Avenel last
night, and that he came thither in company with an old man, of whom
more anon."

"And where is he now?"

"The devil only can answer that question," replied Christie, "for the
devil has possessed the whole family, I think. He took fright, the
foolish lad, at something or other which our Baron did in his moody
humour, and so he jumped into the lake and swam ashore like a
wild-duck. Robin of Redcastle spoiled a good gelding in chasing him
this morning."

"And why did he chase the youth?" said the Sub-Prior; "what harm
had he done?"

"None that I know of," said Christie; "but such was the Baron's order,
being in his mood, and all the world having gone mad, as I have said
before."

"Whither away so fast, Edward?" said the monk.

"To Corri-nan-shian, Father," answered the youth.--"Martin and Dan,
take pickaxe and mattock, and follow me if you be men!"

"Right," said the monk, "and fail not to give us instant notice what
you find."

"If you find aught there like Halbert Glendinning," said Christie,
hallooing after Edward, "I will be bound to eat him unsalted.--'T is a
sight to see how that fellow takes the bent!--It is in the time of
action men see what lads are made of. Halbert was aye skipping up and
down like a roo, and his brother used to sit in the chimney nook with
his book and sic-like trash--But the lad was like a loaded hackbut,
which will stand in the corner as quiet as an old crutch until ye draw
the trigger, and then there is nothing but flash and smoke.--But here
comes my prisoner; and, setting other matters aside, I must pray a
word with you, Sir Sub-Prior, respecting him. I came on before to
treat about him, but I was interrupted with this fasherie."

As he spoke, two more of Avenel's troopers rode into the court-yard,
leading betwixt them a horse, on which, with his hands bound to his
side, sate the reformed preacher, Henry Warden.




Chapter the Thirty-First.


  At school I knew him--a sharp-witted youth,
  Grave, thoughtful, and reserved among his mates,
  Turning the hours of sport and food to labour,
  Starving his body to inform his mind.
                                           OLD PLAY.

The Sub-Prior, at the Borderer's request, had not failed to
return to the tower, into which he was followed by Christie of
the Clinthill, who, shutting the door of the apartment, drew near,
and began his discourse with great confidence and familiarity.

"My master," he said, "sends me with his commendations to you, Sir
Sub-Prior, above all the community of Saint Mary's, and more specially
than even to the Abbot himself; for though he be termed my lord, and
so forth, all the world knows that you are the tongue of the trump."

"If you have aught to say to me concerning the community," said the
Sub-Prior, "it were well you proceeded in it without farther delay.
Time presses, and the fate of young Glendinnning dwells on my mind."

"I will be caution for him, body for body," said Christie. "I do
protest to you, as sure as I am a living man, so surely is he one."

"Should I not tell his unhappy mother the joyful tidings?" said Father
Eustace,--"and yet better wait till they return from searching the
grave. Well, Sir Jackman, your message to me from your master?"

"My lord and master," said Christie, "hath good reason to believe
that, from the information of certain back friends, whom he will
reward at more leisure, your reverend community hath been led to deem
him ill attached to Holy Church, allied with heretics and those who
favour heresy, and a hungerer after the spoils of your Abbey."

"Be brief, good henchman," said the Sub-Prior, "for the devil is ever
most to be feared when he preacheth."

"Briefly, then--my master desires your friendship; and to excuse
himself from the maligner's calumnies, he sends to your Abbot that
Henry Warden, whose sermons have turned the world upside down, to be
dealt with as Holy Church directs, and as the Abbot's pleasure may
determine."

The Sub-Prior's eyes sparkled at the intelligence; for it had been
accounted a matter of great importance that this man should be
arrested, possessed, as he was known to be, of so much zeal and
popularity, that scarcely the preaching of Knox himself had been more
awakening to the people, and more formidable to the Church of Rome.

In fact, that ancient system, which so well accommodated its doctrines
to the wants and wishes of a barbarous age, had, since the art of
printing, and the gradual diffusion of knowledge, lain floating like
some huge Leviathan, into which ten thousand reforming fishers were
darting their harpoons. The Roman Church of Scotland, in particular,
was at her last gasp, actually blowing blood and water, yet still with
unremitted, though animal exertions, maintaining the conflict with the
assailants, who on every side were plunging their weapons into her
bulky body. In many large towns, the monasteries had been suppressed
by the fury of the populace; in other places, their possessions had
been usurped by the power of the reformed nobles; but still the
hierarchy made a part of the common law of the realm, and might claim
both its property and its privileges wherever it had the means of
asserting them. The community of Saint Mary's of Kennaquhair was
considered as being particularly in this situation. They had retained,
undiminished, their territorial power and influence; and the great
barons in the neighbourhood, partly from their attachment to the party
in the state who still upheld the old system of religion, partly
because each grudged the share of the prey which the others must
necessarily claim, had as yet abstained from despoiling the Halidome.
The Community was also understood to be protected by the powerful
Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, whose zealous attachment to
the Catholic faith caused at a later period the great rebellion of the
tenth of Elizabeth.

Thus happily placed, it was supposed by the friends of the decaying
cause of the Roman Catholic faith, that some determined example of
courage and resolution, exercised where the franchises of the church
were yet entire, and her jurisdiction undisputed, might awe the
progress of the new opinions into activity; and, protected by the laws
which still existed, and by the favour of the sovereign, might be the
means of securing the territory which Rome yet preserved in Scotland,
and perhaps of recovering that which she had lost.

The matter had been considered more than once by the northern
Catholics of Scotland, and they had held communication with those of
the south.  Father Eustace, devoted by his public and private vows,
had caught the flame, and had eagerly advised that they should execute
the doom of heresy on the first reformed preacher, or, according to
his sense, on the first heretic of eminence, who should venture within
the precincts of the Halidome. A heart, naturally kind and noble, was,
in this instance, as it has been in many more, deceived by its own
generosity. Father Eustace would have been a bad administrator of the
inquisitorial power of Spain, where that power was omnipotent, and
where judgment was exercised without danger to those who inflicted it.
In such a situation his rigour might have relented in favour of the
criminal, whom it was at his pleasure to crush or to place at freedom.
But in Scotland, during this crisis, the case was entirely different.
The question was, whether one of the spirituality dared, at the hazard
of his own life, to step forward to assert and exercise the rights of
the church. Was there any who would venture to wield the thunder in
her cause, or must it remain like that in the hand of a painted
Jupiter, the object of derision instead of terror? The crisis was
calculated to awake the soul of Eustace; for it comprised the
question, whether he dared, at all hazards to himself, to execute with
stoical severity a measure which, according to the general opinion,
was to be advantageous to the church, and, according to ancient law,
and to his firm belief, was not only justifiable but meritorious.

While such resolutions were agitated amongst the Catholics, chance
placed a victim within their grasp. Henry Warden had, with the
animation proper to the enthusiastic reformers of the age,
transgressed, in the vehemence of his zeal, the bounds of the
discretional liberty allowed to his sect so far, that it was thought
the Queen's personal dignity was concerned in bringing him to justice.
He fled from Edinburgh, with recommendations, however, from Lord James
Stewart, afterwards the celebrated Earl of Murray, to some of the
Border chieftains of inferior rank, who were privately conjured to
procure him safe passage into England. One of the principal persons to
whom such recommendation was addressed, was Julian Avenel; for as yet,
and for a considerable time afterwards, the correspondence and
interest of Lord James lay rather with the subordinate leaders than
with the chiefs of great power, and men of distinguished influence
upon the Border. Julian Avenel had intrigued without scruple with both
parties--yet bad as he was, he certainly would not have practised
aught against the guest whom Lord James had recommended to his
hospitality, had it not been for what he termed the preacher's
officious inter-meddling in his family affairs. But when he had
determined to make Warden rue the lecture he had read him, and the
scene of public scandal which he had caused in his hall, Julian
resolved, with the constitutional shrewdness of his disposition, to
combine his vengeance with his interest.  And therefore, instead of
doing violence on the person of Henry Warden within his own castle, he
determined to deliver him up to the Community of Saint Mary's, and at
once make them the instruments of his own revenge, and found a claim
of personal recompense, either in money, or in a grant of Abbey lands
at a low quit-rent, which last began now to be the established form in
which the temporal nobles plundered the spirituality.

The Sub-Prior, therefore, of Saint Mary's, unexpectedly saw the
steadfast, active, and inflexible enemy of the church delivered into
his hand, and felt himself called upon to make good his promises to
the friends of the Catholic faith, by quenching heresy in the blood of
one of its most zealous professors.

To the honour more of Father Eustace's heart than of his consistency,
the communication that Henry Warden was placed within his power,
struck him with more sorrow than triumph; but his next feelings were
those of exultation. "It is sad," he said to himself, "to cause human
suffering; it is awful to cause human blood to be spilled; but the
judge to whom the sword of Saint Paul, as well as the keys of Saint
Peter, are confided, must not flinch from his task. Our weapon returns
into our own bosom, if not wielded with a steady and unrelenting hand
against the irreconcilable enemies of the Holy Church. _Pereat
iste!_ It is the doom he has incurred, and were all the heretics in
Scotland armed and at his back, they should not prevent its being
pronounced, and, if possible, enforced.--Bring the heretic before me,"
he said, issuing his commands aloud, and in a tone of authority.

Henry Warden was led in, his hands still bound, but his feet at liberty.

"Clear the apartment," said the Sub-Prior, "of all but the necessary
guard on the prisoner."

All retired except Christie of the Clinthill, who, having dismissed
the inferior troopers whom he commanded, unsheathed his sword, and
placed himself beside the door, as if taking upon him the character of
sentinel.

The judge and the accused met face to face, and in that of both was
enthroned the noble confidence of rectitude. The monk was about, at
the utmost risk to himself and his community, to exercise what in his
ignorance he conceived to be his duty. The preacher, actuated by a
better-informed, yet not a more ardent zeal, was prompt to submit to
execution for God's sake, and to seal, were it necessary, his mission
with his blood. Placed at such a distance of time as better enables us
to appreciate the tendency of the principles on which they severally
acted, we cannot doubt to which the palm ought to be awarded. But the
zeal of Father Eustace was as free from passion and personal views as
if it had been exerted in a better cause.

They approached each other, armed each and prepared for intellectual
conflict, and each intently regarding his opponent, as if either hoped
to spy out some defect, some chasm in the armour of his antagonist.--
As they gazed on each other, old recollections began to awake in
either bosom, at the sight of features long unseen and much altered,
but not forgotten.  The brow of the Sub-Prior dismissed by degrees its
frown of command, the look of calm yet stern defiance gradually
vanished from that of Warden, and both lost for an instant that of
gloomy solemnity. They had been ancient and intimate friends in youth
at a foreign university, but had been long separated from each other;
and the change of name, which the preacher had adopted from motives of
safety, and the monk from the common custom of the convent, had
prevented the possibility of their hitherto recognizing each other in
the opposite parts which they had been playing in the great polemical
and political drama. But now the Sub-Prior exclaimed, "Henry
Wellwood!" and the preacher replied, "William Allan!"--and, stirred by
the old familiar names, and never-to-be-forgotten recollections of
college studies and college intimacy, their hands were for a moment
locked in each other.

"Remove his bonds," said the Sub-Prior, and assisted Christie in
performing that office with his own hands, although the prisoner
scarcely would consent to be unbound, repeating with emphasis, that he
rejoiced in the cause for which he suffered shame. When his hands were
at liberty, however, he showed his sense of the kindness by again
exchanging a grasp and a look of affection with the Sub-Prior.

The salute was frank and generous on either side, yet it was but the
friendly recognition and greeting which are wont to take place betwixt
adverse champions, who do nothing in hate but all in honour. As each
felt the pressure of the situation in which they stood, he quitted the
grasp of the other's hand, and fell back, confronting each other with
looks more calm and sorrowful than expressive of any other passion.
The Sub-Prior was the first to speak.

"And is this, then, the end of that restless activity of mind, that
bold and indefatigable love of truth that urged investigation to its
utmost limits, and seemed to take heaven itself by storm--is this the
termination of Wellwood's career?--And having known and loved him
during the best years of our youth, do we meet in our old age as judge
and criminal?"

"Not as judge and criminal," said Henry Warden,--for to avoid
confusion we describe him by his later and best known name--"Not as
judge and criminal do we meet, but as a misguided oppressor and his
ready and devoted victim. I, too, may ask, are these the harvest of
the rich hopes excited by the classical learning, acute logical
powers, and varied knowledge of William Allan, that he should sink to
be the solitary drone of a cell, graced only above the swarm with the
high commission of executing Roman malice on all who oppose Roman
imposture?"

"Not to thee," answered the Sub-Prior, "be assured--not unto thee, nor
unto mortal man, will I render an account of the power with which the
church may have invested me. It was granted but as a deposit for her
welfare--for her welfare it shall at every risk be exercised, without
fear and without favour."

"I expected no less from your misguided zeal," answered the preacher;
"and in me have you met one on whom you may fearlessly exercise your
authority, secure that his mind at least will defy your influence, as
the snows of that Mont Blanc which we saw together, shrink not under
the heat of the hottest summer sun."

"I do believe thee," said the Sub-Prior, "I do believe that thine is
indeed metal unmalleable by force. Let it yield then to persuasion.
Let us debate these matters of faith, as we once were wont to conduct
our scholastic disputes, when hours, nay, days, glided past in the
mutual exercise of our intellectual powers. It may be thou mayest yet
hear the voice of the shepherd, and return to the universal fold."

"No, Allan," replied the prisoner, "this is no vain question, devised
by dreaming scholiasts, on which they may whet their intellectual
faculties until the very metal be wasted away. The errors which I
combat are like those fiends which are only cast out by fasting and
prayer. Alas! not many wise, not many learned are chosen; the cottage
and the hamlet shall in our days bear witness against the schools and
their disciples. Thy very wisdom, which is foolishness, hath made
thee, as the Greeks of old, hold as foolishness that which is the only
true wisdom."

"This," said the Sub-Prior, sternly, "is the mere cant of ignorant
enthusiasm, which appealeth from learning and from authority, from the
sure guidance of that lamp which God hath afforded us in the Councils
and in the Fathers of the Church, to a rash, self-willed, and
arbitrary interpretation of the Scriptures, wrested according to the
private opinion of each speculating heretic."

"I disdain to reply to the charge," replied Warden. "The question at
issue between your Church and mine, is, whether we will be judged by
the Holy Scriptures, or by the devices and decisions of men not less
subject to error than ourselves, and who have defaced our holy
religion with vain devices, reared up idols of stone and wood, in form
of those, who, when they lived, were but sinful creatures, to share
the worship due only to the Creator--established a toll-house betwixt
heaven and hell, that profitable purgatory of which the Pope keeps the
keys, like an iniquitous judge commutes punishment for bribes,
and----"

"Silence, blasphemer," said the Sub-Prior, sternly, "or I will have thy
blatant obloquy stopped with a gag!"

"Ay," replied Warden, "such is the freedom of the Christian conference
to which Rome's priests so kindly invite us!--the gag--the rack--the
axe--is the _ratio ultima Romae_. But know thou, mine ancient
friend, that the character of thy former companion is not so changed
by age, but that he still dares to endure for the cause of truth all
that thy proud hierarchy shall dare to inflict."

"Of that," said the monk, "I nothing doubt--Thou wert ever a lion to
turn against the spear of the hunter, not a stag to be dismayed at the
sound of his bugle."--He walked through the room in silence.
"Wellwood," he said at length, "we can no longer be friends. Our
faith, our hope, our anchor on futurity, is no longer the same."

"Deep is my sorrow that thou speakest truth. May God so judge me,"
said the Reformer, "as I would buy the conversion of a soul like thine
with my dearest heart's blood."

"To thee, and with better reason, do I return the wish," replied the
Sub-Prior; "it is such an arm as thine that should defend the bulwarks
of the Church, and it is now directing the battering-ram against them,
and rendering practicable the breach through which all that is greedy,
and all that is base, and all that is mutable and hot-headed in this
innovating age, already hope to advance to destruction and to spoil.
But since such is our fate, that we can no longer fight side by side
as friends, let us at least act as generous enemies. You cannot have
forgotten,

  'O gran bonta dei caralieri antiqui!
  Erano nemici, eran' de fede diversa'--

Although, perhaps," he added, stopping short in his quotation, "your new
faith forbids you to reserve a place in your memory, even for what high
poets have recorded of loyal faith and generous sentiment."

"The faith of Buchanan," replied the preacher, "the faith of Buchanan
and of Beza, cannot be unfriendly to literature. But the poet you have
quoted affords strains fitter for a dissolute court than for a convent."

"I might retort on your Theodore Beza," said the Sub-Prior, smiling;
"but I hate the judgment that, like the flesh-fly, skims over whatever
is sound, to detect and settle upon some spot which is tainted. But to
the purpose. If I conduct thee or send thee a prisoner to St. Mary's,
thou art to-night a tenant of the dungeon, to-morrow a burden to the
gibbet-tree. If I were to let thee go hence at large, I were thereby
wronging the Holy Church, and breaking mine own solemn vow. Other
resolutions may be adopted in the capital, or better times may
speedily ensue. Wilt thou remain a true prisoner upon thy parole,
rescue or no rescue, as is the phrase amongst the warriors of this
country? Wilt thou solemnly promise that thou wilt do so, and at my
summons thou wilt present thyself before the Abbot and Chapter at
Saint Mary's, and that thou wilt not stir from this house above a
quarter of a mile in any direction? Wilt thou, I say, engage me thy
word for this? and such is the sure trust which I repose in thy good
faith, that thou shalt remain here unharmed and unsecured, a prisoner
at large, subject only to appear before our court when called upon."

The preacher paused--"I am unwilling," he said, "to fetter my native
liberty by any self-adopted engagement. But I am already in your
power, and you may bind me to my answer. By such promise, to abide
within a certain limit, and to appear when called upon, I renounce not
any liberty which I at present possess, and am free to exercise; but,
on the contrary, being in bonds, and at your mercy, I acquire thereby
a liberty which I at present possess not. I will therefore accept of
thy proffer, as what is courteously offered on thy part, and may be
honourably accepted on mine."

"Stay yet," said the Sub-Prior; "one important part of thy engagement
is forgotten--thou art farther to promise, that while thus left at
liberty, thou wilt not preach or teach, directly or indirectly, any of
those pestilent heresies by which so many souls have been in this our
day won over from the kingdom of light to the kingdom of darkness."

"There we break off our treaty," said Warden, firmly--"Wo unto me if
I preach not the Gospel!"

The Sub-Prior's countenance became clouded, and he again paced the
apartment, and muttered, "A plague upon the self-willed fool!" then
stopped short in his walk, and proceeded in his argument.--"Why, by
thine own reasoning, Henry, thy refusal here is but peevish obstinacy.
It is in my power to place you where your preaching can reach no human
ear; in promising therefore to abstain from it, you grant nothing
which you have it in your power to refuse."

"I know not that," replied Henry Warden; "thou mayest indeed cast me
into a dungeon, but can I foretell that my Master hath not task-work
for me to perform even in that dreary mansion? The chains of saints
have, ere now, been the means of breaking the bonds of Satan. In a
prison, holy Paul found the jailor whom he brought to believe the word
of salvation, he and all his house."

"Nay," said the Sub-Prior, in a tone betwixt anger and scorn, "if you
match yourself with the blessed Apostle, it were time we had done--
prepare to endure what thy folly, as well as thy heresy,
deserves.--Bind him, soldier."

With proud submission to his fate, and regarding the Sub-Prior with
something which almost amounted to a smile of superiority, the preacher
placed his arms so that the bonds could be again fastened round him.

"Spare me not," he said to Christie; for even that ruffian hesitated
to draw the cord straitly.

The Sub-Prior, meanwhile, looked at him from under his cowl, which he
had drawn over his head, and partly over his face, as if he wished to
shade his own emotions. They were those of a huntsman within
point-blank shot of a noble stag, who is yet too much struck with his
majesty of front and of antler to take aim at him. They were those of
a fowler, who, levelling his gun at a magnificent eagle, is yet
reluctant to use his advantage when he sees the noble sovereign of the
birds pruning himself in proud defiance of whatever may be attempted
against him. The heart of the Sub-Prior (bigoted as he was) relented,
and he doubted if he ought to purchase, by a rigorous discharge of
what he deemed his duty, the remorse he might afterwards feel for the
death of one so nobly independent in thought and character, the
friend, besides, of his own happiest years, during which they had,
side by side, striven in the noble race of knowledge, and indulged
their intervals of repose in the lighter studies of classical and
general letters.

The Sub-Prior's hand pressed his half-o'ershadowed cheek, and his eye,
more completely obscured, was bent on the ground, as if to hide the
workings of his relenting nature.

"Were but Edward safe from the infection," he thought to
himself--"Edward, whose eager and enthusiastic mind presses forward in
the chase of all that hath even the shadow of knowledge, I might trust
this enthusiast with the women, after due caution to them that they
cannot, without guilt, attend to his reveries."

As the Sub-Prior revolved these thoughts, and delayed the definitive
order which was to determine the fate of the prisoner, a sudden noise
at the entrance of the tower diverted his attention for an instant,
and, his cheek and brow inflamed with all the glow of heat and
determination, Edward Glendinning rushed into the room.

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Thirty-Second.


  Then in my gown of sober gray
    Along the mountain path I'll wander,
  And wind my solitary way
    To the sad shrine that courts me yonder.

  There, in the calm monastic shade,
    All injuries may be forgiven;
  And there for thee, obdurate maid,
    My orisons shall rise to heaven.
          THE CRUEL LADY OF THE MOUNTAINS.

The first words which Edward uttered were,--"My brother is safe,
reverend father--he is safe, thank God, and lives!--There is not in
Corri-nan-shian a grave, nor a vestige of a grave. The turf around
the fountain has neither been disturbed by pick-axe, spade, nor
mattock, since the deer's-hair first sprang there. He lives as surely
as I live!"

The earnestness of the youth--the vivacity with which he looked and
moved--the springy step, outstretched hand, and ardent eye, reminded
Henry Warden of Halbert, so lately his guide. The brothers had indeed
a strong family resemblance, though Halbert was far more athletic and
active in his person, taller and better knit in the limbs, and though
Edward had, on ordinary occasions, a look of more habitual acuteness
and more profound reflection. The preacher was interested as well as
the Sub-Prior.

"Of whom do you speak, my son?" he said, in a tone as unconcerned as
if his own fate had not been at the same instant trembling in the
balance, and as if a dungeon and death did not appear to be his
instant doom--"Of whom, I say, speak you? If of a youth somewhat older
than you seem to be--brown-haired, open-featured, taller and stronger
than you appear, yet having much of the same air and of the same tone
of voice--if such a one is the brother whom you seek, it may be I can
tell you news of him."

"Speak, then, for Heaven's sake," said Edward--"life or death lies on
thy tongue!"

The Sub-Prior joined eagerly in the same request, and, without waiting
to be urged, the preacher gave so minute an account of the
circumstances under which he met the elder Glendinning, with so exact
a description of his person, that there remained no doubt as to his
identity. When he mentioned that Halbert Glendinning had conducted him
to a dell in which they found the grass bloody, and a grave newly
closed, and told how the youth accused himself of the slaughter of Sir
Piercie Shafton, the Sub-Prior looked on Edward with astonishment.

"Didst thou not say, even now," he said, "that there was no vestige of a
grave in that spot?"

"No more vestige of the earth having been removed than if the turf had
grown there since the days of Adam," replied Edward Glendinning. "It is
true," he added, "that the adjacent grass was trampled and bloody."

"These are delusions of the Enemy," said the Sub-Prior, crossing
himself.--"Christian men may no longer doubt of it."

"But an it be so," said Warden, "Christian men might better guard
themselves by the sword of prayer than by the idle form of a
cabalistical spell."

"The badge of our salvation," said the Sub-Prior, "cannot be so
termed--the sign of the cross disarmeth all evil spirits."

"Ay," answered Henry Warden, apt and armed for controversy, "but it
should be borne in the heart, not scored with the fingers in the air.
That very impassive air, through which your hand passes, shall as soon
bear the imprint of your action, as the external action shall avail
the fond bigot who substitutes vain motions of the body, idle
genuflections, and signs of the cross, for the living and heart-born
duties of faith and good works."

"I pity thee," said the Sub-Prior, as actively ready for polemics as
himself,--"I pity thee, Henry, and reply not to thee. Thou mayest as
well winnow forth and measure the ocean with a sieve, as mete out the
power of holy words, deeds, and signs, by the erring gauge of thine
own reason."

"Not by mine own reason would I mete them," said Warden; "but by
His holy Word, that unfading and unerring lamp of our paths, compared to
which human reason is but as a glimmering and fading taper, and your
boasted tradition only a misleading wildfire. Show me your Scripture
warrant for ascribing virtue to such vain signs and motions!"

"I offered thee a fair field of debate," said the Sub-Prior, "which
thou didst refuse. I will not at present resume the controversy."

"Were these my last accents," said the reformer, "and were they
uttered at the stake, half-choked with smoke, and as the fagots
kindled into a blaze around me, with that last utterance I would
testify against the superstitious devices of Rome."

The Sub-Prior suppressed with pain the controversial answer which
arose to his lips, and, turning to Edward Glendinning, he said, "there
could be now no doubt that his mother ought presently to be informed
that her son lived."

"I told you that two hours since," said Christie of the Clinthill, "an
you would have believed me. But it seems you are more willing to take
the word of an old gray sorner, whose life has been spent in pattering
heresy, than mine, though I never rode a foray in my life without duly
saying my paternoster."

"Go then," said Father Eustace to Edward; "let thy sorrowing mother
know that her son is restored to her from the grave, like the child of
the widow of Zarephath; at the intercession," he added, looking at
Henry Warden, "of the blessed Saint whom I invoked in his behalf."

"Deceived thyself," said Warden, instantly, "thou art a deceiver of
others. It was no dead man, no creature of clay, whom the blessed
Tishbite invoked, when, stung by the reproach of the Shunamite woman,
he prayed that her son's soul might come into him again."

"It was by his intercession, however," repeated the Sub-Prior; "for
what says the Vulgate? Thus it is written: '_Et exaudivit Dominus
vocem Helie; et reversa est anima pueri intra cum, et
revixit_;'--and thinkest thou the intercession of a glorified saint
is more feeble than when he walks on earth, shrouded in a tabernacle
of clay, and seeing but with the eye of flesh?"

During this controversy Edward Glendinning appeared restless and
impatient, agitated by some internal feeling, but whether of joy,
grief, or expectation, his countenance did not expressly declare. He
took now the unusual freedom to break in upon the discourse of the
Sub-Prior, who, notwithstanding his resolution to the contrary, was
obviously kindling in the spirit of controversy, which Edward diverted
by conjuring his reverence to allow him to speak a few words with him
in private.

"Remove the prisoner," said the Sub-Prior to Christie; "look to him
carefully that he escape not; but for thy life do him no injury."

His commands being obeyed, Edward and the monk were left alone, when
the Sub-Prior thus addressed him:

"What hath come over thee, Edward, that thy eye kindles so wildly, and
thy cheek is thus changing from scarlet to pale? Why didst thou break
in so hastily and unadvisedly upon the argument with which I was
prostrating yonder heretic? And wherefore dost thou not tell thy
mother that her son is restored to her by the intercession, as Holy
Church well warrants us to believe, of Blessed Saint Benedict, the
patron of our Order? For if ever my prayers were put forth to him with
zeal, it hath been in behalf of this house, and thine eyes have seen
the result--go tell it to thy mother."

"I must tell her then," said Edward, "that if she has regained one son,
another is lost to her."

"What meanest thou, Edward? what language is this?" said the Sub-Prior.

"Father," said the youth, kneeling down to him, "my sin and my shame
shall be told thee, and thou shalt witness my penance with thine own
eyes."

"I comprehend thee not," said the Sub-Prior. "What canst thou have
done to deserve such self-accusation?--Hast thou too listened," he
added, knitting his brows, "to the demon of heresy, ever most
effectual tempter of those, who, like yonder unhappy man, are
distinguished by their love of knowledge?"

"I am guiltless in that matter," answered Glendinning, "nor have
presumed to think otherwise than thou, my kind father, hast taught me,
and than the Church allows."

"And what is it then, my son," said the Sub-Prior, kindly, "which thus
afflicts thy conscience? speak it to me, that I may answer thee in the
words of comfort; for the Church's mercy is great to those obedient
children who doubt not her power."

"My confession will require her mercy," replied Edward. "My brother
Halbert--so kind, so brave, so gentle, who spoke not, thought not,
acted not, but in love to me, whose hand had aided me in every
difficulty, whose eye watched over me like the eagle's over her
nestlings, when they prove their first flight from the eyry--this
brother, so kind, so gently affectionate--I heard of his sudden, his
bloody, his violent death, and I rejoiced--I heard of his unexpected
restoration, and I sorrowed!"

"Edward," said the father, "thou art beside thyself--what could urge
thee to such odious ingratitude?--In your hurry of spirits you have
mistaken the confused tenor of your feelings--Go, my son, pray and
compose thy mind--we will speak of this another time."

"No, father, no," said Edward, vehemently, "now or never!--I will find
the means to tame this rebellious heart of mine, or I will tear it out
of my bosom--Mistake its passions?--No, father, grief can ill be
mistaken for joy--All wept, all shrieked around me--my mother--the
menials--she too, the cause of my crime--all wept--and I--I could
hardly disguise my brutal and insane joy under the appearance of
revenge--Brother, I said, I cannot give thee tears, but I will give
thee blood--Yes, father, as I counted hour after hour, while I kept
watch upon the English prisoner, and said, I am an hour nearer to hope
and to happiness----"

"I understand thee not, Edward," said the monk, "nor can I conceive in
what way thy brother's supposed murder should have affected thee with
such unnatural joy--Surely the sordid desire to succeed him in his
small possessions----"

"Perish the paltry trash!" said Edward, with the same emotion. "No,
father, it was rivalry--it was jealous rage--it was the love of Mary
Avenel, that rendered me the unnatural wretch I confess myself!"

"Of Mary Avenel!" said the Priest--"of a lady so high above either of
you in name and in rank? How dared Halbert--how dared you, to presume
to lift your eye to her but in honour and respect, as a superior of
another degree from yours?"

"When did love wait for the sanction of heraldry?" replied Edward;
"and in what but a line of dead ancestors was Mary, our mother's guest
and foster-child, different from us, with whom she was brought up?--
Enough, we loved--we both loved her! But the passion of Halbert was
requited. He knew it not, he saw it not--but I was sharper-eyed. I saw
that even when I was more approved, Halbert was more beloved. With me
she would sit for hours at our common task with the cold simplicity
and indifference of a sister, but with Halbert she trusted not
herself. She changed colour, she was fluttered when he approached her;
and when he left her, she was sad, pensive, and solitary. I bore all
this--I saw my rival's advancing progress in her affections--I bore
it, father, and yet I hated him not--I could not hate him!"

"And well for thee that thou didst not," said the father; "wild and
headstrong as thou art, wouldst thou hate thy brother for partaking in
thine own folly?"

"Father," replied Edward, "the world esteems thee wise, and holds thy
knowledge of mankind high; but thy question shows that thou hast never
loved. It was by an effort that I saved myself from hating my kind and
affectionate brother, who, all unsuspicious of my rivalry, was
perpetually loading me with kindness. Nay, there were moods of my
mind, in which I could return that kindness for a time with energetic
enthusiasm. Never did I feel this so strongly as on the night which
parted us. But I could not help rejoicing when he was swept from my
path--could not help sorrowing when he was again restored to be a
stumbling-block in my paths."

"May God be gracious to thee, my son!" said the monk; "this is an
awful state of mind. Even in such evil mood did the first murderer
rise up against his brother, because Abel's was the more acceptable
sacrifice."

"I will wrestle with the demon which has haunted me, father," replied
the youth, firmly--"I will wrestle with him, and I will subdue him.
But first I must remove from the scenes which are to follow here. I
cannot endure that I should see Mary Avenel's eyes again flash with
joy at the restoration of her lover. It were a sight to make indeed a
second Cain of me!  My fierce, turbid, and transitory joy discharged
itself in a thirst to commit homicide, and how can I estimate the
frenzy of my despair?"

"Madman!" said the Sub-Prior, "at what dreadful crime does thy fury
drive?"

"My lot is determined, father," said Edward, in a resolute tone; "I
will embrace the spiritual state which you have so oft recommended. It
is my purpose to return with you to Saint Mary's, and, with the
permission of the Holy Virgin and of Saint Benedict, to offer my
profession to the Abbot."

"Not now, my son," said the Sub-Prior, "not in this distemperature of
mind. The wise and good accept not gifts which are made in heat of
blood, and which may be after repented of; and shall we make our
offerings to wisdom and to goodness itself with less of solemn
resolution and deep devotion of mind, than is necessary to make them
acceptable to our own frail companions in this valley of darkness?
This I say to thee, my son, not as meaning to deter thee from the good
path thou art now inclined to prefer, but that thou mayst make thy
vocation and thine election sure."

"There are actions, father," returned Edward, "which brook no delay,
and this is one. It must be done this very _now_; or it may never
be done. Let me go with you; let me not behold the return of Halbert
into this house.  Shame, and the sense of the injustice I have already
done him, will join with these dreadful passions which urge me to do
him yet farther wrong.  Let me then go with you."

"With me, my son," said the Sub-Prior, "thou shalt surely go; but our
rule, as well as reason and good order, require that you should dwell
a space with us as a probationer, or novice, before taking upon thee
those final vows, which, sequestering thee for ever from the world,
dedicate thee to the service of Heaven."

"And when shall we set forth, father?" said the youth, as eagerly as
if the journey which he was now undertaking led to the pleasures of a
summer holiday.

"Even now, if thou wilt," said the Sub-Prior, yielding to his
impetuosity--"go, then, and command them to prepare for our
departure.--Yet stay," he said, as Edward, with all the awakened
enthusiasm of his character, hastened from his presence, "come hither,
my son, and kneel down."

Edward obeyed, and kneeled down before him. Notwithstanding his slight
figure and thin features, the Sub-Prior could, from the energy of his
tone, and the earnestness of his devotional manner, impress his pupils
and his penitents with no ordinary feelings of personal reverence. His
heart always was, as well as seemed to be, in the duty which he was
immediately performing; and the spiritual guide who thus shows a deep
conviction of the importance of his office, seldom fails to impress a
similar feeling upon his hearers. Upon such occasions as the present,
his puny body seemed to assume more majestic stature--his spare and
emaciated countenance bore a bolder, loftier, and more commanding
port--his voice, always beautiful, trembled as labouring under the
immediate impulse of the Divinity--and his whole demeanour seemed to
bespeak, not the mere ordinary man, but the organ of the Church in
which she had vested her high power for delivering sinners from their
load of iniquity.

"Hast thou, my fair son," said he, "faithfully recounted the
circumstances which have thus suddenly determined thee to a religious
life?"

"The sins I have confessed, my father," answered Edward, "but I have
not yet told of a strange appearance, which, acting in my mind, hath, I
think, aided to determine my resolution."

"Tell it, then, now," returned the Sub-Prior; "it is thy duty to leave
me uninstructed in nought, so that thereby I may understand the
temptation that besets thee."

"I tell it with unwillingness," said Edward; "for although, God wot, I
speak but the mere truth, yet even while my tongue speaks it as truth,
my own ears receive it as fable."

"Yet say the whole," said Father Eustace; "neither fear rebuke from
me, seeing I may know reasons for receiving as true that which others
might regard as fabulous."

"Know, then, father," replied Edward, "that betwixt hope and
despair--and, heavens! what a hope!--the hope to find the corpse
mangled and crushed hastily in amongst the bloody clay which the foot
of the scornful victor had trod down upon my good, my gentle, my
courageous brother,--I sped to the glen called Corri-nan-shian; but,
as your reverence has been already informed, neither the grave, which
my unhallowed wishes had in spite of my better self longed to see, nor
any appearance of the earth having been opened, was visible in the
solitary spot where Martin had, at morning yesterday, seen the fatal
hillock. You know your dalesmen, father. The place hath an evil name,
and this deception of the sight inclined them to leave it. My
companions became affrighted, and hastened down the glen as men caught
in trespass. My hopes were too much blighted, my mind too much
agitated, to fear either the living or the dead. I descended the glen
more slowly than they, often looking back, and not ill pleased with
the poltroonery of my companions, which left me to my own perplexed
and moody humour, and induced them to hasten into the broader dale.
They were already out of sight, and lost amongst the windings of the
glen, when, looking back, I saw a female form standing beside the
fountain----"

"How, my fair son?" said the Sub-Prior, "beware you jest not with your
present situation!"

"I jest not, father," answered the youth; "it may be I shall never
jest again--surely not for many a day. I saw, I say, the form of a
female clad in white, such as the Spirit which haunts the house of
Avenel is supposed to be. Believe me, my father, for, by heaven and
earth, I say nought but what I saw with these eyes!"

"I believe thee, my son," said the monk; "proceed in thy strange
story."

"The apparition," said Edward Glendinning, "sung, and thus ran her
lay; for, strange as it may seem to you, her words abide by my
remembrance as if they had been sung to me from infancy upward:--

  'Thou who seek'st my fountain lone,
  With thoughts and hopes thou dar'st not own;
  Whose heart within leap'd wildly glad
  When most his brow seem'd dark and sad;
  Hie thee back, thou find'st not here
  Corpse or coffin, grave or bier;
  The Dead Alive is gone and fled--
  Go thou, and join the Living Dead!

  'The Living Dead, whose sober brow
  Oft shrouds such thoughts as thou hast now,
  Whose hearts within are seldom cured
  Of passions by their vows abjured;
  Where, under sad and solemn show,
  Vain hopes are nursed, wild wishes glow.
  Seek the convent's vaulted room,
  Prayer and vigil be thy doom;
  Doff the green, and don the gray,
  To the cloister hence away!'"

"'Tis a wild lay," said the Sub-Prior, "and chanted, I fear me, with
no good end. But we have power to turn the machinations of Satan to
his shame. Edward, thou shalt go with me as thou desirest; thou shalt
prove the life for which I have long thought thee best fitted--thou
shalt aid, my son, this trembling hand of mine to sustain the Holy
Ark, which bold unhallowed men press rashly forward to touch and to
profane.--Wilt thou not first see thy mother?"

"I will see no one," said Edward, hastily; "I will risk nothing that
may shake the purpose of my heart. From Saint Mary's they shall learn
my destination--all of them shall learn it. My mother--Mary Avenel--my
restored and happy brother--they shall all know that Edward lives no
longer to the world to be a clog on their happiness. Mary shall no
longer need to constrain her looks and expressions to coldness because
I am nigh.  She shall no longer----"

"My son," said the Sub-Prior, interrupting him, "it is not by looking
back on the vanities and vexations of this world, that we fit
ourselves for the discharge of duties which are not of it. Go, get our
horses ready, and, as we descend the glen together, I will teach thee
the truths through which the fathers and wise men of old had that
precious alchemy, which can convert suffering into happiness."




Chapter the Thirty-Third.


  Now, on my faith, this gear is all entangled,
  Like to the yarn-clew of the drowsy knitter,
  Dragg'd by the frolic kitten through the cabin,
  While the good dame sits nodding o'er the fire!
  Masters, attend; 'twill crave some skill to clear it.
                                       OLD PLAY.

Edward, with the speed of one who doubts the steadiness of his own
resolution, hastened to prepare the horses for their departure, and at
the same time thanked and dismissed the neighbours who had come to his
assistance, and who were not a little surprised both at the suddenness
of his proposed departure, and at the turn affairs had taken.

"Here's cold hospitality," quoth Dan of the Howlet-hirst to his
comrades; "I trow the Glendinnings may die and come alive right oft,
ere I put foot in stirrup again for the matter."

Martin soothed them by placing food and liquor before them. They ate
sullenly, however, and departed in bad humour.

The joyful news that Halbert Glendinning lived, was quickly
communicated through the sorrowing family. The mother wept and thanked
Heaven alternately; until her habits of domestic economy awakening as
her feelings became calmer, she observed, "It would be an unco task to
mend the yetts, and what were they to do while they were broken in
that fashion? At open doors dogs come in."

Tibb remarked, "She aye thought Halbert was ower gleg at his weapon to
be killed sae easily by ony Sir Piercie of them a'. They might say of
these Southrons as they liked; but they had not the pith and wind of a
canny Scot, when it came to close grips."

On Mary Avenel the impression was inconceivably deeper. She had but
newly learned to pray, and it seemed to her that her prayers had been
instantly answered--that the compassion of Heaven, which she had
learned to implore in the words of Scripture, had descended upon her
after a manner almost miraculous, and recalled the dead from the grave
at the sound of her lamentations. There was a dangerous degree of
enthusiasm in this strain of feeling, but it originated in the purest
devotion.

A silken and embroidered muffler, one of the few articles of more
costly attire which she possessed, was devoted to the purpose of
wrapping up and concealing the sacred volume, which henceforth she was
to regard as her chiefest treasure, lamenting only that, for want of a
fitting interpreter, much must remain to her a book closed and a
fountain sealed. She was unaware of the yet greater danger she
incurred, of putting an imperfect or even false sense upon some of the
doctrines which appeared most comprehensible. But Heaven had provided
against both these hazards.

While Edward was preparing the horses, Christie of the Clinthill again
solicited his orders respecting the reformed preacher, Henry Warden,
and again the worthy monk laboured to reconcile in his own mind the
compassion and esteem which, almost in spite of him, he could not help
feeling for his former companion, with the duty which he owed to the
Church. The unexpected resolution of Edward had removed, he thought,
the chief objection to his being left at Glendearg.

"If I carry this Well-wood, or Warden, to the Monastery." he thought,
"he must die--die in his heresy--perish body and soul. And though such
a measure was once thought advisable, to strike terror into the
heretics, yet such is now their daily increasing strength, that it may
rather rouse them to fury and to revenge. True, he refuses to pledge
himself to abstain from sowing his tares among the wheat; but the
ground here is too barren to receive them. I fear not his making
impression on these poor women, the vassals of the Church, and bred up
in due obedience to her behests. The keen, searching, inquiring, and
bold disposition of Edward, might have afforded fuel to the fire; but
that is removed, and there is nothing left which the flame may catch
to.--Thus shall he have no power to spread his evil doctrines abroad,
and yet his life shall be preserved, and it may be his soul rescued as
a prey from the fowler's net. I will myself contend with him in
argument; for when we studied in common, I yielded not to him, and
surely the cause for which I struggle will support me, were I yet more
weak than I deem myself. Were this man reclaimed from his errors, an
hundred-fold more advantage would arise to the Church from his
spiritual regeneration, than from his temporal death."

Having finished these meditations, in which there was at once goodness
of disposition and narrowness of principle, a considerable portion of
self-opinion, and no small degree of self-delusion, the Sub-Prior
commanded the prisoner to be brought into his presence.

"Henry," he said, "whatever a rigid sense of duty may demand of me,
ancient friendship and Christian compassion forbid me to lead thee to
assured death. Thou wert wont to be generous, though stern and
stubborn in thy resolves; let not thy sense of what thine own thoughts
term duty, draw thee farther than mine have done. Remember, that every
sheep whom thou shalt here lead astray from the fold, will be demanded
in time and through eternity of him who hath left thee the liberty of
doing such evil. I ask no engagement of thee, save that thou remain a
prisoner on thy word at this tower, and wilt appear when summoned."

"Thou hast found an invention to bind my hands," replied the preacher,
"more sure than would have been the heaviest shackles in the prison of
thy convent. I will not rashly do what may endanger thee with thy
unhappy superiors, and I will be the more cautious, because, if we had
farther opportunity of conference, I trust thine own soul may yet be
rescued as a brand from the burning, and that, casting from thee the
livery of Anti-Christ, that trader in human sins and human souls, I
may yet assist thee to lay hold on the Rock of Ages."

The Sub-Prior heard the sentiment, so similar to that which had
occurred to himself, with the same kindly feelings with which the
game-cock hears and replies to the challenge of his rival.

"I bless God and Our Lady," said he, drawing himself up, "that my
faith is already anchored on that Rock on which Saint Peter founded
his Church."

"It is a perversion of the text," said the eager Henry Warden,
"grounded on a vain play upon words--a most idle paronomasia."

The controversy would have been rekindled, and in all probability--for
what can insure the good temper and moderation of polemics?--might
have ended in the preacher's being transported a captive to the
Monastery, had not Christie of the Clinthill observed that it was
growing late, and that he, having to descend the glen, which had no
good reputation, cared not greatly for travelling there after sunset.
The Sub-Prior, therefore, stifled his desire of argument, and again
telling the preacher, that he trusted to his gratitude and generosity,
he bade him farewell.

"Be assured, my old friend," replied Warden, "that no willing act of
mine shall be to thy prejudice. But if my Master shall place work
before me, I must obey God rather than man."

These two men, both excellent from natural disposition and acquired
knowledge, had more points of similarity than they themselves would
have admitted. In truth, the chief distinction betwixt them was, that
the Catholic, defending a religion which afforded little interest to
the feelings, had, in his devotion to the cause he espoused, more of
the head than of the heart, and was politic, cautious, and artful;
while the Protestant, acting under the strong impulse of more
lately-adopted conviction, and feeling, as he justly might, a more
animated confidence in his cause, was enthusiastic, eager, and
precipitate in his desire to advance it. The priest would have been
contented to defend, the preacher aspired to conquer; and, of course,
the impulse by which the latter was governed, was more active and more
decisive. They could not part from each other without a second
pressure of hands, and each looked in the face of his old companion,
as he bade him adieu, with a countenance strongly expressive of
sorrow, affection, and pity.

Father Eustace then explained briefly to Dame Glendinning, that this
person was to be her guest for some days, forbidding her and her whole
household, under high spiritual censures, to hold any conversation
with him on religious subjects, but commanding her to attend to his
wants in all other particulars.

"May Our Lady forgive me, reverend father," said Dame Glendinning,
somewhat dismayed at this intelligence, "but I must needs say, that
ower mony guests have been the ruin of mony a house, and I trow they
will bring down Glendearg. First came the Lady of Avenel--(her soul be
at rest--she meant nae ill)--but she brought with her as mony bogles
and fairies, as hae kept the house in care ever since, sae that we
have been living as it were in a dream. And then came that English
knight, if it please you, and if he hasna killed my son outright, he
has chased him aff the gate, and it may be lang eneugh ere I see him
again--forby the damage done to outer door and inner door. And now
your reverence has given me the charge of a heretic, who, it is like,
may bring the great horned devil himself down upon us all; and they
say that it is neither door nor window will serve him, but he will
take away the side of the auld tower along with him. Nevertheless,
reverend father, your pleasure is doubtless to be done to our power."

"Go to, woman," said the Sub-Prior; "send for workmen from the
clachan, and let them charge the expense of their repairs to the
Community, and I will give the treasurer warrant to allow them.
Moreover, in settling the rental mails, and feu-duties, thou shalt
have allowance for the trouble and charges to which thou art now put,
and I will cause strict search to be made after thy son."

The dame curtsied deep and low at each favourable expression; and when
the Sub-Prior had done speaking, she added her farther hope that the
Sub-Prior would hold some communing with her gossip the Miller,
concerning the fate of his daughter, and expound to him that the
chance had by no means happened through any negligence on her part.

"I sair doubt me, father," she said, "whether Mysie finds her way back
to the Mill in a hurry; but it was all her father's own fault that let
her run lamping about the country, riding on bare-backed naigs, and
never settling to do a turn of wark within doors, unless it were to
dress dainties at dinner-time for his ain kyte."

"You remind me, dame, of another matter of urgency," said Father
Eustace; "and, God knows, too many of them press on me at this moment.
This English knight must be sought out, and explanation given to him
of these most strange chances. The giddy girl must also be recovered.
If she hath suffered in reputation by this unhappy mistake, I will not
hold myself innocent of the disgrace. Yet how to find them out I know
not."

"So please you," said Christie of the Clinthill, "I am willing to take
the chase, and bring them back by fair means or foul; for though you
have always looked as black as night at me, whenever we have
forgathered, yet I have not forgotten that had it not been for you, my
neck would have kend the weight of my four quarters. If any man can
track the tread of them, I will say in the face of both Merse and
Teviotdale, and take the Forest to boot, I am that man. But first I
have matters to treat of on my master's score, if you will permit me
to ride down the glen with you."

"Nay, but my friend," said the Sub-Prior, "thou shouldst remember I
have but slender cause to trust thee for a companion through a place
so solitary."

"Tush! tush!" said the Jackman, "fear me not; I had the worst too
surely to begin that sport again. Besides, have I not said a dozen of
times, I owe you a life? and when I owe a man either a good turn or a
bad, I never fail to pay it sooner or later. Moreover, beshrew me if I
care to go alone down the glen, or even with my troopers, who are,
every loon of them, as much devil's bairns as myself; whereas, if your
reverence, since that is the word, take beads and psalter, and I come
along with jack and spear, you will make the devils take the air, and
I will make all human enemies take the earth."

Edward here entered, and told his reverence that his horse was
prepared. At this instant his eye caught his mother's, and the
resolution which he had so strongly formed was staggered when he
recollected the necessity of bidding her farewell. The Sub-Prior saw
his embarrassment, and came to his relief.

"Dame," said he, "I forgot to mention that your son Edward goes with
me to Saint Mary's, and will not return for two or three days."

"You'll be wishing to help him to recover his brother? May the saints
reward your kindness!"

The Sub-Prior returned the benediction which, in this instance, he had
not very well deserved, and he and Edward set forth on their route.
They were presently followed by Christie, who came up with his
followers at such a speedy pace, as intimated sufficiently that his
wish to obtain spiritual convoy through the glen, was extremely
sincere. He had, however, other matters to stimulate his speed, for he
was desirous to communicate to the Sub-Prior a message from his master
Julian, connected with the delivery of the prisoner Warden; and having
requested the Sub-Prior to ride with him a few yards before Edward,
and the troopers of his own party, he thus addressed him, sometimes
interrupting his discourse in a manner testifying that his fear of
supernatural beings was not altogether lulled to rest by his
confidence in the sanctity of his fellow-traveller.

"My master," said the rider, "deemed he had sent you an acceptable
gift in that old heretic preacher; but it seems, from the slight care
you have taken of him, that you make small account of the boon."

"Nay," said the Sub-Prior, "do not thus judge of it. The Community
must account highly of the service, and will reward it to thy master in
goodly fashion. But this man and I are old friends, and I trust to bring
him back from the paths of perdition."

"Nay," said the moss-trooper, "when I saw you shake hands at the
beginning I counted that you would fight it all out in love and
honour, and that there would be no extreme dealings betwixt ye--
however it is all one to my master--Saint Mary! what call you yon, Sir
Monk?"

"The branch of a willow streaming across the path betwixt us and the
sky."

"Beshrew me," said Christie, "if it looked not like a man's hand
holding a sword.--But touching my master, he, like a prudent man, hath
kept himself aloof in these broken times, until he could see with
precision what footing he was to stand upon. Right tempting offers he
hath had from the Lords of Congregation, whom you call heretics; and
at one time he was minded, to be plain with you, to have taken their
way--for he was assured that the Lord James [Footnote: Lord James
Stewart, afterwards the Regent Murray.] was coming this road at the
head of a round body of cavalry. And accordingly Lord James did so far
reckon upon him, that he sent this man Warden, or whatsoever be his
name, to my master's protection, as an assured friend; and, moreover,
with tidings that he himself was marching hitherward at the head of a
strong body of horse."

"Now, Our Lady forfend!" said the Sub-Prior.

"Amen!" answered Christie, in some trepidation, "did your reverence
see aught?"

"Nothing whatever," replied the monk; "it was thy tale which wrested
from me that exclamation."

"And it was some cause," replied he of the Clinthill, "for if Lord
James should come hither, your Halidome would smoke for it. But be of
good cheer--that expedition is ended before it was begun. The Baron of
Avenel had sure news that Lord James has been fain to march westward
with his merry-men, to protect Lord Semple against Cassilis and the
Kennedies.  By my faith, it will cost him a brush; for wot ye what
they say of that name,--

  "Twixt Wigton and the town of Ayr,
    Portpatrick and the cruives of Cree,
  No man need think for to bide there,
    Unless he court Saint Kennedie.'"

"Then," said the Sub-Prior, "the Lord James's purpose of coming
southwards being broken, cost this person, Henry Warden, a cold
reception at Avenel Castle."

"It would not have been altogether so rough a one," said the
mosstrooper; "for my master was in heavy thought what to do in these
unsettled times, and would scarce have hazarded misusing a man sent to
him by so terrible a leader as the Lord James. But, to speak the
truth, some busy devil tempted the old man to meddle with my master's
Christian liberty of hand-fasting with Catherine of Newport. So that
broke the wand of peace between them, and now ye may have my master,
and all the force he can make, at your devotion, for Lord James never
forgave wrong done to him; and if he come by the upper hand, he will
have Julian's head if there were never another of the name, as it is
like there is not, excepting the bit slip of a lassie yonder. And now
I have told you more of my master's affairs than he would thank me
for; but you have done me a frank turn once, and I may need one at
your hands again."

"Thy frankness," said the Sub-Prior, "shall surely advantage thee; for
much it concerns the Church in these broken times to know the purposes
and motives of those around us. But what is it that thy master expects
from us in reward of good service? for I esteem him one of those who are
not willing to work without their hire."

"Nay, that I can tell you flatly; for Lord James had promised him, in
case he would be of his faction in these parts, an easy tack of the
teindsheaves of his own Barony of Avenel, together with the lands of
Cranberry-moor, which lie intersected with his own. And he will look
for no less at your hand."

"But there is old Gilbert of Cranberry-moor," said the Sub-Prior;
"what are we to make of him? The heretic Lord James may take on him to
dispone upon the goods and lands of the Halidome at his pleasure,
because, doubtless, but for the protection of God, and the baronage
which yet remain faithful to their creed, he may despoil us of them by
force; but while they are the property of the Community, we may not
take steadings from ancient and faithful vassals, to gratify the
covetousness of those who serve God only from the lucre of gain."

"By the mass," said Christie, "it is well talking, Sir Priest; but
when ye consider that Gilbert has but two half-starved cowardly
peasants to follow him, and only an auld jaded aver to ride upon,
fitter for the plough than for manly service; and that the Baron of
Avenel never rides with fewer than.  ten jackmen at his back, and
oftener with fifty, bodin in all that effeirs to war as if they were
to do battle for a kingdom, and mounted on nags that nicker at the
clash of the sword as if it were the clank of the lid of a
corn-chest--I say, when ye have computed all this, ye may guess what
course will best serve your Monastery."

"Friend," said the monk, "I would willingly purchase thy master's
assistance on his own terms, since times leave us no better means of
defence against sacrilegious spoliation of heresy; but to take from a
poor man his patrimony--"

"For that matter," said the rider, "his seat would scarce be a soft
one, if my master thought that Gilbert's interest stood betwixt him
and what he wishes. The Halidome has land enough, and Gilbert may be
quartered elsewhere."

"We will consider the possibility of so disposing the matter," said
the monk, "and will expect in consequence your master's most active
assistance, with all the followers he can make, to join in the defence
of the Halidome, against any force by which it may be threatened."

"A man's hand and a mailed glove on that," said the jackman. "They

[Footnote: As some atonement for their laxity of morals on most
occasions, the Borderers were severe observers of the faith which they
had pledged, even to an enemy. If any person broke his word so
plighted, the individual to whom faith had not been observed, used to
bring to the next Border-meeting a glove hung on the point of a spear,
and proclaim to Scots and English the name of the defaulter. This was
accounted so great a disgrace to all connected with him, that his own
clansmen sometimes destroyed him, to escape the infamy he had brought
on them.

Constable, a spy engaged by Sir Ralph Sadler, talks of two Border
thieves, whom he used as his guides:--"That they would not care to
steal, and yet that they would not betray any man that trusts in them,
for all the gold in Scotland or in France. They are my guides and
outlaws. If they would betray me they might get their pardons, and
cause me to be hanged; but I have tried them ere this."--_Sadler's
letters during the Northern Insurrection._]

call us marauders, thieves, and what not; but the side we take we hold
by.--And I will be blithe when my Baron comes to a point which side he
will take, for the castle is a kind of hell, (Our Lady forgive me for
naming such a word in this place!) while he is in his mood, studying
how he may best advantage himself. And now, Heaven be praised, we are
in the open valley, and I may swear a round oath, should aught happen
to provoke it."

"My friend," said the Sub-Prior, "thou hast little merit in abstaining
from oaths or blasphemy, if it be only out of fear of evil spirits."

"Nay, I am not quite a Church vassal yet," said the jackman, "and if
you link the curb too tight on a young horse, I promise you he will
rear--Why, it is much for me to forbear old customs on any account
whatever."

The night being fine, they forded the river at the spot where the
Sacristan met with his unhappy encounter with the spirit. As soon as
they arrived at the gate of the Monastery, the porter in waiting
eagerly exclaimed, "Reverend father, the Lord Abbot is most anxious
for your presence."

"Let these strangers be carried to the great hall," said the Sub-Prior,
"and be treated with the best by the cellarer; reminding them, however,
of that modesty and decency of conduct which becometh guests in a house
like this."

"But the Lord Abbot demands you instantly, my venerable brother," said
Father Philip, arriving in great haste. "I have not seen him more
discouraged or desolate of counsel since the field of Pinkie-cleugh
was stricken,"

"I come, my good brother, I come," said Father Eustace. "I pray thee,
good brother, let this youth, Edward Glendinning, be conveyed to the
Chamber of the Novices, and placed under their instructor. God hath
touched his heart, and he proposeth laying aside the vanities of the
world, to become a brother of our holy order; which, if his good parts
be matched with fitting docility and humility, he may one day live to
adorn."

"My very venerable brother," exclaimed old Father Nicholas, who came
hobbling with a third summons to the Sub-Prior, "I pray thee to hasten
to our worshipful Lord Abbot. The holy patroness be with us! never saw
I Abbot of the House of St. Mary's in such consternation; and yet I
remember me well when Father Ingelram had the news of Flodden-field."

"I come, I come, venerable brother," said Father Eustace--And having
repeatedly ejaculated "I come!" he at last went to the Abbot in good
earnest.




Chapter the Thirty-Fourth.


  It is not texts will do it--Church artillery
  Are silenced soon by real ordnance,
  And canons are but vain opposed to cannon.
  Go, coin your crosier, melt your church plate down
  Bid the starved soldier banquet in your halls,
  And quaff your long-saved hogsheads--Turn them out
  Thus primed with your good cheer, to guard your wall,
  And they will venture for't.--
                                 OLD PLAY.

The Abbot received his counsellor with a tremulous eagerness of
welcome, which announced to the Sub-Prior an extreme agitation of
spirits, and the utmost need of good counsel. There was neither
mazer-dish nor standing-cup upon the little table, at the elbow of his
huge chair of state; his beads alone lay there, and it seemed as if he
had been telling them in his extremity of distress. Beside the beads
was placed the mitre of the Abbot, of an antique form, and blazing
with precious stones, and the rich and highly-embossed crosier rested
against the same table.

The Sacristan and old Father Nicholas had followed the Sub-Prior into
the Abbot's apartment, perhaps with the hope of learning something of
the important matter which seemed to be in hand.--They were not
mistaken; for, after having ushered in the Sub-Prior, and being
themselves in the act of retiring, the Abbot made them a signal to
remain.

"My brethren," he said, "it is well known to you with what painful
zeal we have overseen the weighty affairs of this house committed to
our unworthy hand--your bread hath been given to you, and your water
hath been sure--I have not wasted the revenues of the Convent on vain
pleasures, as hunting or hawking, or in change of rich cope or alb, or
in feasting idle bards and jesters, saving those who, according to old
wont, were received in time of Christmas and Easter. Neither have I
enriched either mine own relations nor strange women, at the expense
of the Patrimony."

"There hath not been such a Lord Abbot," said Father Nicholas, "to
my knowledge, since the days of Abbot Ingelram, who----"

At that portentous word, which always preluded a long story, the Abbot
broke in.

"May God have mercy on his soul!--we talk not of him now.--What I
would know of ye, my brethren, is, whether I have, in your mind,
faithfully discharged the duties of mine office?"

"There has never been subject of complaint," answered the Sub-Prior.

The Sacristan, more diffuse, enumerated the various acts of indulgence
and kindness which the mild government of Abbot Boniface had conferred
on the brotherhood of Saint Mary's--the _indulgentiae_--the
_gratias_--the _biberes_-the weekly mess of boiled
almonds--the enlarged accommodation of the refectory--the better
arrangement of the cellarage--the improvement of the revenue of the
Monastery--the diminution of the privations of the brethren.

"You might have added, my brother," said the Abbot, listening with
melancholy acquiescence to the detail of his own merits, "that I
caused to be built that curious screen, which secureth the cloisters
from the north-east wind.--But all these things avail nothing--As we
read in holy Maccabee, _Capta est civitas per voluntatem Dei_. It
hath cost me no little thought, no common toil, to keep these weighty
matters in such order as you have seen them--there was both barn and
binn to be kept full--Infirmary, dormitory, guest-hall, and refectory,
to be looked to--processions to be made, confessions to be heard,
strangers to be entertained, _veniae_ to be granted or refused;
and I warrant me, when every one of you was asleep in your cell, the
Abbot hath lain awake for a full hour by the bell, thinking how these
matters might be ordered seemly and suitably."

"May we ask, reverend my lord," said the Sub-Prior, "what additional
care has now been thrown upon you, since your discourse seems to point
that way?"

"Marry, this it is," said the Abbot. "The talk is not now of _biberes_,

[Footnote: The _biberes, caritas_, and boiled almonds, of which
Abbot Boniface speaks, were special occasions for enjoying luxuries,
afforded to the monks by grants from different sovereigns, or from
other benefactors to the convent. There is one of these charters
called _De Pitancia Centum Librarum_ By this charter, which is
very curious, our Robert Bruce, on the 10th January, and in the
twelfth year of his reign, assigns, out of the customs of Berwick, and
failing them, out of the customs of Edinburgh or Haddington, the sum
of one hundred pounds, at the half-yearly terms of Pentecost and Saint
Martin's in winter, to the abbot and community of the monks of
Melrose. The precise purpose of this annuity is to furnish to each of
the monks of the said monastery, while placed at food in the
refectory, an extra mess of rice boiled with milk, or of almonds, or
peas, or other pulse of that kind which could be procured in the
country. This addition to their commons is to be entitled the King's
Mess. And it is declared, that although any monk should, from some
honest apology, want appetite or inclination to eat of the king's
mess, his share should, nevertheless, be placed on the table with
those of his brethren, and afterwards carried to the gate and given to
the poor. "Neither is it our pleasure," continues the bountiful
sovereign, "that the dinner, which is or ought to be served up to the
said monks according to their ancient rule, should be diminished in
quantity, or rendered inferior in quality, on account of this our
mess, so furnished as aforesaid." It is, moreover, provided, that the
abbot, with the consent of the most sage of his brethren, shall name a
prudent and decent monk for receiving, directing, and expending, all
matters concerning this annuity for the benefit of the community,
agreeably to the royal desire and intention, rendering a faithful
account thereof to the abbot and superiors of the same convent. And
the same charter declares the king's farther pleasure, that the said
men of religion should be bound yearly and for ever, in acknowledgment
of the above donation, to clothe fifteen poor men at the feast of
Saint Martin in winter, and to feed them on the same day, delivering
to each of them four ells of large or broad, or six ells of narrow
cloth, and to each also a new pair of shoes or sandals, according to
their order; and if the said monks shall fail in their engagements or
any of them, it is the king's will that the fault shall be redeemed by
a double performance of what has been omitted, to be executed at the
sight of the chief forester of Ettrick for the time being, and before
the return of Saint Martin's day succeeding that on which the omission
has taken place.

Of this charter, respecting the pittance of 100_l_ assigned to
furnish the monks of Melrose with a daily mess of boiled rice,
almonds, or other pulse, to mend their commons, the antiquarian reader
will be pleased, doubtless, to see the original.

CARTA REGIS ROBERTI I. ABBATI ET CONVENTUI DE MELROSS.

_Carta de Pitancia Centum Librarum._

Robertus Dei gracia Rex Scottorum omnibus probis hominibus tocius
terre sue Salutem. Sciatis nos pro salute anime nostre et pro salute
animarum antecessorum et suocessorum nostrorum Regum Scocie Dedisse
Concessisse et hac presenti Carta nostra confirmasse Deo et Beate
Marie virgini et Religiosis viris Abbati et Conventui de Melross et
eorum successoribus in perpetuum Centum Libras Sterlingorum Annui
Redditus singulis annis percipiendas de firmis nostris Burgi Berwici
super. Twedam ad terminos Pentecostis et Sancti Martini in hyeme pro
equali portione vel de nova Custuma nostra Burgi predicti si firme
nostre predicte ad dictam summam pecunie sufficere non poterunt vel de
nova Custuma nostra Burgorum nostrorum de Edenburg et de Hadington Si
firme nostre et Custuma nostra ville Berwici aliquo casu contingente
ad hoc forte non sufficiant. Ita quod dicta summa pecunie Centum
Librarum eis annuatim integre et absque contradictione aliqua plenarie
persolvatur pre cunctis aliis quibuscunque assignacionibus per nos
factis seu faciendis ad inveniendum in perpetunm singulis diebus
cuilibet monacho monasterii predicti comedenti in Refectorio unum
sufficiens ferculum risarum factarum cum lacte, amigdalarum vel
pisarum sive aliorum ciborum consimilis condicionis inventornm in
patria et illud ferculum ferculum Regis vocabitur in eternum. Et si
aliquis monachus ex aliqua causa honesta de dicto ferculo comedere
noluerit vel refici non poterit non minus attamen sibi de dicto
ferculo ministretur et ad portam pro pauperibus deportetur. Nec
volumus quod occasione ferculi nostri predicti prandium dicti
Conventus de quo antiquitus communiter eis deserviri sive ministrari
solebat in aliquo pejoretur seu diminuatur. Volum us insuper et
ordinamus quod Abbas ejusdem monasterii qui pro tempore fuerit de
cousensu saniorum de Conventu specialiter constituat unum monachum
providum et discretum ad recipiendum ordinandum et expendendum totam
summam pecunie memorate pro utilitate conventus secundum votum et
intencionem mentis nostre superius annotatum et ad reddendum fidele
compotum coram Abbate et Maioribus de Conventu singulis annis de
pecunia sic recepta. Et volumus quod dicti religiosi teneantur
annuatim in perpetuum pro predicta donacione nostra ad perpetuam
nostri memoriam vestire quindecim pauperes ad festum Sancti Martini in
hieme et eosdem cibare eodem die liberando eorum cuilibet quatuor
ulnas panni grossi et lati vel sex ulnas panni stricti et eorum
cuilibet unum novum par sotularium de ordine suo. Et si dicti
religiosi in premissis vel aliquo premissorum aliquo anno defecerint
volumus quod illud quod minus perimpletum fuerit dupplicetur diebus
magis necessariis per visum capitalis forestarii nostri de Selkirk,
qui pro tempore fuerit. Et quod dicta dupplicatio fiat ante natale
domini proximo sequens festum Sancti Martini predictum. In cujus rei
testimonium presenti Carte nostre sigillum nostrum precipimus apponi.
Testibus venerabilibus in Christo patribus Willielmo, Johanne,
Willielmo et David Sancti Andree, Glasguensis, Dunkeldensis et
Moraviensis ecclesiarum dei gracia episcopis Bernardo Abbate de
Abirbrothock Cancellario, Duncano, Malisio, et Hugone de Fyf de
Strathin et de Ross, Comitibus Waltero Senescallo Scocie, Jacobo
domini de Duglas et Alexandro Fraser Camerario nostro Socie militibus.
Apud Abirbrothock, decimo die Januarij. Anno Regni nostri vicesimo.]

or of _caritas_, or of boiled almonds, but of an English band
coming against us from Hexham, commanded by Sir John Foster; nor is it
of the screening us from the east wind, but how to escape Lord James
Stewart, who cometh to lay waste and destroy with his heretic
soldiers."

"I thought that purpose had been broken by the feud between Semple and
the Kennedies," said the Sub-Prior, hastily.

"They have accorded that matter at the expense of the church as
usual," said the Abbot; "the Earl of Cassilis is to have the
teind-sheaves of his lands, which were given to the house of
Crossraguel, and he has stricken hands with Stewart, who is now called
Murray.--_Principes convenerunt unum adversus Dominum._--There
are the letters."

The Sub-Prior took the letters, which had come by an express messenger
from the Primate of Scotland, who still laboured to uphold the
tottering fabric of the system under which he was at length buried,
and, stepping towards the lamp, read them with an air of deep and
settled attention--the Sacristan and Father Nicholas looked as
helplessly at each other, as the denizens of the poultry-yard when the
hawk soars over it. The Abbot seemed bowed down with the extremity of
sorrowful apprehension, but kept his eye timorously fixed on the
Sub-Prior, as if striving to catch some comfort from the expression of
his countenance. When at length he beheld that, after a second intent
perusal of the letters, he remained still silent and full of thought,
he asked him in an anxious tone, "What is to be done?"

"Our duty must be done," answered the Sub-Prior, "and the rest is in
the hands of God."

"Our duty--our duty?" answered the Abbot, impatiently; "doubtless we
are to do our duty; but what is that duty? or how will it serve
us?--Will bell, book, and candle, drive back the English heretics? or
will Murray care for psalms and antiphonars? or can I fight for the
Halidome, like Judas Maccabeus, against those profane Nicanors? or
send the Sacristan against this new Holofernes, to bring back his head
in a basket?"

"True, my Lord Abbot," said the Sub-Prior, "we cannot fight with
carnal weapons, it is alike contrary to our habit and vow; but we can
die for our Convent and for our Order. Besides, we can arm those who
will and can fight. The English are but few in number, trusting, as it
would seem, that they will be joined by Murray, whose march has been
interrupted. If Foster, with his Cumberland and Hexham bandits,
ventures to march into Scotland, to pillage and despoil our House, we
will levy our vassals, and, I trust, shall be found strong enough to
give him battle."

"In the blessed name of Our Lady," said the Abbot, "think you that I
am Petrus Eremita, to go forth the leader of an host?"

"Nay," said the Sub-Prior, "let some man skilled in war lead our
people--there is Julian Avenel, an approved soldier."

"But a scoffer, a debauched person, and, in brief, a man of Belial,"
quoth the Abbot.

"Still," said the monk, "we must use his ministry in that to which he
has been brought up. We can guerdon him richly, and indeed I already
know the price of his service. The English, it is expected, will
presently set forth, hoping here to seize upon Piercie Shafton, whose
refuge being taken with us, they make the pretext of this unheard-of
inroad."

"Is it even so?" said the Abbot; "I never judged that his body of satin
and his brain of feathers boded us much good."

"Yet we must have his assistance, if possible," said the Sub-Prior;
"he may interest in our behalf the great Piercie, of whose friendship
he boasts, and that good and faithful Lord may break Foster's purpose.
I will despatch the jackman after him with all speed.--Chiefly,
however, I trust to the military spirit of the land, which will not
suffer peace to be easily broken on the frontier. Credit me, my lord,
it will bring to our side the hands of many, whose hearts may have
gone astray after strange doctrines.  The great chiefs and barons will
be ashamed to let the vassals of peaceful monks fight unaided against
the old enemies of Scotland."

"It may be," said the Abbot, "that Foster will wait for Murray, whose
purpose hitherward is but delayed for a short space."

"By the rood, he will not," said the Sub-Prior; "we know this Sir John
Foster--a pestilent heretic, he will long to destroy the church--born
a Borderer, he will thirst to plunder her of her wealth--a
Border-warden, he will be eager to ride in Scotland. There are too
many causes to urge him on. If he joins with Murray, he will have at
best but an auxiliary's share of the spoil--if he comes hither before
him, he will reckon on the whole harvest of depredation as his own.
Julian Avenel also has, as I have heard, some spite against Sir John
Foster; they will fight, when they meet, with double determination.--
Sacristan, send for our bailiff.--Where is the roll of fencible men
liable to do suit and service to the Halidome?--Send off to the Baron
of Meigallot; he can raise threescore horse and better--Say to him the
Monastery will compound with him for the customs of his bridge, which
have been in controversy, if he will show himself a friend at such a
point.--And now, my lord, let us compute our possible numbers, and
those of the enemy, that human blood be not spilled in vain--Let us
therefore calculate----"

"My brain is dizzied with the emergency," said the poor Abbot--"I am
not, I think, more a coward than others, so far as my own person is
concerned; but speak to me of marching and collecting soldiers, and
calculating forces, and you may as well tell of it to the youngest
novice of a nunnery. But my resolution is taken.--Brethren," he said,
rising up, and coming forward with that dignity which his comely
person enabled him to assume, "hear for the last time the voice of
your Abbot Boniface. I have done for you the best that I could; in
quieter times I had perhaps done better, for it was for quiet that I
sought the cloister, which has been to me a place of turmoil, as much
as if I had sate in the receipt of custom, or ridden forth as leader
of an armed host. But now matters turn worse and worse, and I, as I
grow old, am less able to struggle with them. Also, it becomes me not
to hold a place, whereof the duties, through my default or misfortune,
may be but imperfectly filled by me. Wherefore I have resolved to
demit this mine high office, so that the order of these matters may
presently devolve upon Father Eustatius here present, our well-beloved
Sub-Prior; and I now rejoice that he hath not been provided according
to his merits elsewhere, seeing that I well hope he will succeed to
the mitre and staff which it is my present purpose to lay down."

"In the name of Our Lady, do nothing hastily, my lord!" said Father
Nicholas--"I do remember that when the worthy Abbot Ingelram, being in
his ninetieth year--for I warrant you he could remember when Benedict
the Thirteenth was deposed--and being ill at ease and bed-rid, the
brethren rounded in his ear that he were better resign his office. And
what said he, being a pleasant man? marry, that while he could crook
his little finger he would keep hold of the crosier with it."

The Sacristan also strongly remonstrated against the resolution of his
Superior, and set down the insufficiency he pleaded to the native
modesty of his disposition. The Abbot listened in downcast silence;
even flattery could not win his ear.

Father Eustace took a nobler tone with his disconcerted and dejected
Superior. "My Lord Abbot," he said, "if I have been silent concerning
the virtues with which you have governed this house, do not think that
I am unaware of them. I know that no man ever brought to your high
office a more sincere wish to do well to all mankind; and if your rule
has not been marked with the bold lines which sometimes distinguished
your spiritual predecessors, their faults have equally been strangers
to your character."

"I did not believe," said the Abbot, turning his looks to Father
Eustace with some surprise, "that you, father, of all men, would have
done me this justice."

"In your absence," said the Sub-Prior, "I have even done it more
fully.  Do not lose the good opinion which all men entertain of you,
by renouncing your office when your care is most needed."

"But, my brother," said the Abbot, "I leave a more able in my place."

"That you do not," said Eustace; "because it is not necessary you
should resign, in order to possess the use of whatever experience or
talent I may be accounted master of. I have been long enough in this
profession to know that the individual qualities which any of us may
have, are not his own, but the property of the Community, and only so
far useful when they promote the general advantage. If you care not in
person, my lord, to deal with this troublesome matter, let me implore
you to go instantly to Edinburgh, and make what friends you can in our
behalf, while I in your absence will, as Sub-Prior, do my duty in
defence of the Halidome. If I succeed, may the honour and praise be
yours, and if I fail, let the disgrace and shame be mine own."

The Abbot mused for a space, and then replied,--"No, Father Eustatius,
you shall not conquer me by your generosity. In times like these, this
house must have a stronger pilotage than my weak hands afford; and he
who steers the vessel must be chief of the crew. Shame were it to
accept the praise of other men's labours; and, in my poor mind, all
the praise which can be bestowed on him who undertakes a task so
perilous and perplexing, is a meed beneath his merits. Misfortune to
him would deprive him of an iota of it! Assume, therefore, your
authority to-night, and proceed in the preparations you judge
necessary. Let the Chapter be summoned to-morrow after we have heard
mass, and all shall be ordered as I have told you. Benedicite, my
brethren!--peace be with you! May the new Abbot-expectant sleep as
sound as he who is about to resign his mitre."

They retired, affected even to tears. The good Abbot had shown a point
of his character to which they were strangers. Even Father Eustace had
held his spiritual Superior hitherto as a good-humoured, indolent,
self-indulgent man, whose chief merit was the absence of gross faults;
so that this sacrifice of power to a sense of duty, even if a little
alloyed by the meaner motives of fear and apprehended difficulties,
raised him considerably in the Sub-Prior's estimation. He even felt an
aversion to profit by the resignation of the Abbot Boniface, and in a
manner to rise on his ruins; but this sentiment did not long contend
with those which led him to recollect higher considerations. It could
not be denied that Boniface was entirely unfit for his situation in
the present crisis; and the Sub-Prior felt that he himself, acting
merely as a delegate, could not well take the decisive measures which
the time required; the weal of the Community therefore demanded his
elevation. If, besides, there crept in a feeling of a high dignity
obtained, and the native exultation of a haughty spirit called to
contend with the imminent dangers attached to a post of such
distinction, these sentiments were so cunningly blended and
amalgamated with others of a more disinterested nature, that, as the
Sub-Prior himself was unconscious of their agency, we, who have a
regard for him, are not solicitous to detect it.

The Abbot elect carried himself with more dignity than formerly, when
giving such directions as the pressing circumstances of the times
required; and those who approached him could perceive an unusual
kindling of his falcon eye, and an unusual flush upon his pale and
faded cheek. With briefness and precision he wrote and dictated
various letters to different barons, acquainting them with the
meditated invasion of the Halidome by the English, and conjuring them
to lend aid and assistance as in a common cause. The temptation of
advantage was held out to those whom he judged less sensible of the
cause of honour, and all were urged by the motives of patriotism and
ancient animosity to the English. The time had been when no such
exhortations would have been necessary. But so essential was
Elizabeth's aid to the reformed party in Scotland, and so strong was
that party almost every where, that there was reason to believe a
great many would observe neutrality on the present occasion, even if
they did not go the length of uniting with the English against the
Catholics.

When Father Eustace considered the number of the immediate vassals
of the church whose aid he might legally command, his heart sunk at the
thoughts of ranking them under the banner of the fierce and profligate
Julian Avenel.

"Were the young enthusiast Halbert Glendinning to be found," thought
Father Eustace in his anxiety, "I would have risked the battle under
his leading, young as he is, and with better hope of God's blessing.
But the bailiff is now too infirm, nor know I a chief of name whom I
might trust in this important matter better than this Avenel."--He
touched a bell which stood on the table, and commanded Christie of the
Clinthill to be brought before him.--"Thou owest me a life," said he
to that person on his entrance, "and I may do thee another good turn
if thou be'st sincere with me."

Christie had already drained two standing-cups of wine, which would, on
another occasion, have added to the insolence of his familiarity. But at
present there was something in the augmented dignity of manner of Father
Eustace, which imposed a restraint on him. Yet his answers partook of
his usual character of undaunted assurance. He professed himself willing
to return a true answer to all inquiries.

"Has the Baron (so styled) of Avenel any friendship with Sir John
Foster, Warden of the West Marches of England?"

"Such friendship as is between the wild-cat and the terrier," replied
the rider.

"Will he do battle with him should they meet?"

"As surely," answered Christie, "as ever cock fought on
Shrovetide-even."

"And would he fight with Foster in the Church's quarrel?"

"On any quarrel, or upon no quarrel whatever," replied the jackman.

"We will then write to him, letting him know, that if upon occasion of
an apprehended incursion by Sir John Foster, he will join his force
with ours, he shall lead our men, and be gratified for doing so to the
extent of his wish.--Yet one word more--Thou didst say thou couldst
find out where the English knight Piercie Shafton has this day fled
to?"

"That I can, and bring him back too, by fair means or force, as best
likes your reverence."

"No force must be used upon him. Within what time wilt thou find him
out?"

"Within thirty hours, so he have not crossed the Lothian firth--If it
is to do you a pleasure, I will set off directly, and wind him as a
sleuth-dog tracks the moss-trooper," answered Christie.

"Bring him hither then, and thou wilt deserve good at our hands, which
I may soon have free means of bestowing on thee."

"Thanks to your reverence, I put myself in your reverence's hands. We
of the spear and snaffle walk something recklessly through life; but
if a man were worse than he is, your reverence knows he must live, and
that's not to be done without shifting, I trow."

"Peace, sir, and begone on thine errand--thou shalt have a letter from
us to Sir Piercie."

Christie made two steps towards the door; then turning back and
hesitating, like one who would make an impertinent pleasantry if he
dared, he asked what he was to do with the wench Mysie Happer whom the
Southron knight had carried off with him.

"Am I to bring her hither, please your reverence?"

"Hither, you malapert knave?" said the churchman; "remember you to
whom you speak?"

"No offence meant," replied Christie; "but if such is not your will, I
would carry her to Avenel Castle, where a well-favoured wench was
never unwelcome.

"Bring the unfortunate girl to her father's and break no scurril jests
here," said the Sub-Prior--"See that thou guide her in all safety and
honour."

"In safety, surely," said the rider, "and in such honour as her
outbreak has left her.--I bid your reverence farewell, I must be on
horse before cock-crow."

"What, in the dark!--how knowest thou which way to go?"

"I tracked the knight's horse-tread as far as near to the ford, as we
rode along together," said Christie, "and I observed the track turn to
the north-ward.  He is for Edinburgh, I will warrant you--so soon as
daylight comes I will be on the road again. It is a kenspeckle
hoof-mark, for the shoe was made by old Eckie of Cannobie--I would
swear to the curve of the caulker." So saying, he departed.

"Hateful necessity," said Father Eustace, looking after him, "that
obliges us to use such implements as these! But assailed as we are on
all sides, and by all conditions of men, what alternative is left
us?--But now let me to my most needful task."

The Abbot elect accordingly sate down to write letters, arrange
orders, and take upon him the whole charge of an institution which
tottered to its fall, with the same spirit of proud and devoted
fortitude wherewith the commander of a fortress, reduced nearly to the
last extremity, calculates what means remain to him to protract the
fatal hour of successful storm. In the meanwhile Abbot Boniface,
having given a few natural sighs to the downfall of the pre-eminence
he had so long enjoyed amongst his brethren, fell fast asleep, leaving
the whole cares and toils of office to his assistant and
[Chapter ending is missing in the original]




Chapter the Thirty-Fifth.


  And when he came to broken briggs,
    He slacked his bow and swam;
  And when he came to grass growing,
    Set down his feet and ran.
                         GIL MORRICE.

We return to Halbert Glendinning, who, as our readers may remember,
took the high road to Edinburgh. His intercourse with the preacher,
Henry Warden, from whom he received a letter at the moment of his
deliverance, had been so brief, that he had not even learned the name
of the nobleman to whose care he was recommended. Something like a
name had been spoken indeed, but he had only comprehended that he was
to meet the chief advancing towards the south, at the head of a party
of horse. When day dawned on his journey he was in the same
uncertainty. A better scholar would have been informed by the address
of the letter, but Halbert had not so far profited by Father Eustace's
lessons as to be able to decipher it. His mother-wit taught him that
he must not, in such uncertain times, be too hasty in asking
information of any one; and when, after a long day's journey, night
surprised him near a little village, he began to be dubious and
anxious concerning the issue of his journey.

In a poor country, hospitality is generally exercised freely, and
Halbert, when he requested a night's quarters, did nothing either
degrading or extraordinary.  The old woman, to whom he made this
request, granted it the more readily, that she thought she saw some
resemblance between Halbert and her son Saunders, who had been killed
in one of the frays so common in the time. It is true, Saunders was a
short square-made fellow, with red hair and a freckled face, and
somewhat bandy-legged, whereas the stranger was of a brown complexion,
tall, and remarkably well-made. Nevertheless, the widow was clear that
there existed a general resemblance betwixt her guest and Saunders,
and kindly pressed him to share of her evening cheer.  A pedlar, a man
of about forty years old, was also her guest, who talked with great
feeling of the misery of pursuing such a profession as his in the time
of war and tumult.

"We think much of knights and soldiers," said he; "but the
pedder-coffe who travels the land has need of more courage than them
all. I am sure he maun face mair risk, God help him. Here have I come
this length, trusting the godly Earl of Murray would be on his march
to the Borders, for he was to have guestened with the Baron of Avenel;
and instead of that comes news that he has gone westlandways about
some tuilzie in Ayrshire.  And what to do I wot not; for if I go to
the south without a safeguard, the next bonny rider I meet might ease
me of sack and pack, and maybe of my life to boot; and then, if I try
to strike across the moors, I may be as ill off before I can join
myself to that good Lord's company."

No one was quicker at catching a hint than Halbert Glendinning. He
said he himself had a desire to go westward. The pedlar looked at him
with a very doubtful air, when the old dame, who perhaps thought her
young guest resembled the umquhile Saunders, not only in his looks,
but in a certain pretty turn to sleight-of-hand, which the defunct was
supposed to have possessed, tipped him the wink, and assured the
pedlar he need have no doubt that her young cousin was a true man.

"Cousin!" said the pedlar, "I thought you said this youth had been a
stranger."

"Ill hearing makes ill rehearsing," said the landlady; "he is a
stranger to me by eye-sight, but that does not make him a stranger to
me by blood, more especially seeing his likeness to my son Saunders,
poor bairn."

The pedlar's scruples and jealousies being thus removed, or at least
silenced, the travellers agreed that they would proceed in company
together the next morning by daybreak, the pedlar acting as a guide to
Glendinning, and the youth as a guard to the pedlar, until they should
fall in with Murray's detachment of horse. It would appear that the
lady never doubted what was to be the event of this compact, for,
taking Glendinning aside, she charged him, "to be moderate with the
puir body, but at all events, not to forget to take a piece of black
say, to make the auld wife a new rokelay." Halbert laughed and took
his leave.

It did not a little appal the pedlar, when, in the midst of a black
heath, the young man told him the nature of the commission with which
their hostess had charged him. He took heart, however, upon seeing the
open, frank, and friendly demeanor of the youth, and vented his
exclamations on the ungrateful old traitress. "I gave her," he said,
"yesterday-e'en nae farther gane, a yard of that very black say, to
make her a couvre-chef; but I see it is ill done to teach the cat the
way to the kirn."

Thus set at ease on the intentions of his companion (for in those
happy days the worst was always to be expected from a stranger), the
pedlar acted as Halbert's guide over moss and moor, over hill and many
a dale, in such a direction as might best lead them towards the route
of Murray's party. At length they arrived upon the side of an
eminence, which commanded a distant prospect over a tract of savage
and desolate moorland, marshy and waste--an alternate change of
shingly hill and level morass, only varied by blue stagnant pools of
water. A road scarcely marked winded like a serpent through the
wilderness, and the pedlar, pointing to it, said--"The road from
Edinburgh to Glasgow. Here we must wait, and if Murray and his train
be not already passed by, we shall soon see trace of them, unless some
new purpose shall have altered their resolution; for in these blessed
days no man, were he the nearest the throne, as the Earl of Murray may
be, knows when he lays his head on his pillow at night where it is to
lie upon the following even."

They paused accordingly and sat down, the pedlar cautiously using for
a seat the box which contained his treasures, and not concealing from
his companion that he wore under his cloak a pistolet hanging at his
belt in case of need. He was courteous, however, and offered Halbert a
share of the provisions which he carried about him for refreshment.
They were of the coarsest kind--oat-bread baked in cakes, oatmeal
slaked with cold water, an onion or two, and a morsel of smoked ham
completed the feast. But such as it was, no Scotsman of the time, had
his rank been much higher than that of Glendinning, would have refused
to share in it, especially as the pedlar produced, with a mysterious
air, a tup's horn, which he carried slung from his shoulders, and
which, when its contents were examined, produced to each party a
clam-shell-full of excellent usquebaugh--a liquor strange to Halbert,
for the strong waters known in the south of Scotland came from France,
and in fact such were but rarely used. The pedlar recommended it as
excellent, said he had procured it in his last visit to the braes of
Doune, where he had securely traded under the safe-conduct of the
Laird of Buchanan. He also set an example to Halbert, by devoutly
emptying the cup "to the speedy downfall of Anti-Christ."

Their conviviality was scarce ended, ere a rising dust was seen on the
road of which they commanded the prospect, and half a score of
horsemen were dimly descried advancing at considerable speed, their
casques glancing, and the points of their spears twinkling as they
caught a glimpse of the sun.

"These," said the pedlar, "must be the out-scourers of Murray's party;
let us lie down in the peat-hag, and keep ourselves out of sight."

"And why so?" said Halbert; "let us rather go down and make a signal
to them."

"God forbid!" replied the pedlar; "do you ken so ill the customs of
our Scottish nation? That plump of spears that are spurring on so fast
are doubtless commanded by some wild kinsman of Morton, or some such
daring fear-nothing as neither regards God nor man. It is their
business, if they meet with any enemies, to pick quarrels and clear
the way of them; and the chief knows nothing of what happens, coming
up with his more discreet and moderate friends, it may be a full mile
in the rear. Were we to go near these lads of the laird's belt, your
letter would do you little good, and my pack would do me muckle black
ill; they would tirl every steek of claithes from our back, fling us
into a moss-hag with a stone at our heels, naked as the hour that
brought us into this cumbered and sinful world, and neither Murray nor
any other man ever the wiser. But if he did come to ken of it, what
might he help it?--it would be accounted a mere mistake, and there
were all the moan made. O credit me, youth, that when men draw cold
steel on each other in their native country, they neither can nor may
dwell deeply on the offences of those whose swords are useful to
them."

They suffered, therefore, the vanguard, as it might be termed, of the
Earl of Murray's host to pass forward; and it was not long until a
denser cloud of dust began to arise to the northward.

"Now," said the pedlar, "let us hurry down the hill; for to tell the
truth," said he, dragging Halbert along earnestly, "a Scottish noble's
march is like a serpent--the head is furnished with fangs, and the
tail hath its sting; the only harmless point of access is the main
body."

"I will hasten as fast as you," said the youth; "but tell me why the
rearward of such an army should be as dangerous as the van?"

"Because, as the vanguard consists of their picked wild desperates,
resolute for mischief, such as neither fear God nor regard their
fellow-creatures, but understand themselves bound to hurry from the
road whatever is displeasing to themselves, so the rear-guard consists
of misproud serving-men, who, being in charge of the baggage, take
care to amend by their exactions upon travelling-merchants and others,
their own thefts on their master's property. You will hear the
advanced _enfans perdus_, as the French call them, and so they
are indeed, namely, children of the fall, singing unclean and fulsome
ballads of sin and harlotrie. And then will come on the middle-ward,
when you will hear the canticles and psalms sung by the reforming
nobles, and the gentry, and honest and pious clergy, by whom they are
accompanied. And last of all, you will find in the rear a legend of
godless lackies, palfreniers, and horse-boys, talking of nothing but
dicing, drinking, and drabbing."

As the pedlar spoke, they had reached the side of the high-road, and
Murray's main body was in sight, consisting of about three hundred
horse, marching with great regularity, and in a closely compacted
body. Some of the troopers wore the liveries of their masters, but
this was not common. Most of them were dressed in such colours as
chance dictated. But the majority, being clad in blue cloth, and the
whole armed with cuirass and back-plate, with sleeves of mail,
gauntlets, and poldroons, and either mailed hose or strong jack-boots,
they had something of a uniform appearance.

Many of the leaders were clad in complete armour, and all in a certain
half-military dress, which no man of quality in those disturbed times
ever felt himself sufficiently safe to abandon.

The foremost of this party immediately rode up to the pedlar and to
Halbert Glendinning, and demanded of them who they were. The pedlar
told his story, the young Glendinning exhibited his letter, which a
gentleman carried to Murray. In an instant after, the word "Halt!" was
given through the squadron, and at once the onward heavy tramp, which
seemed the most distinctive attribute of the body, ceased, and was
heard no more. The command was announced that the troop should halt
here for an hour to refresh themselves and their horses. The pedlar
was assured of safe protection, and accommodated with the use of a
baggage horse. But at the same time he was ordered into the rear; a
command which he reluctantly obeyed, and not without wringing
pathetically the hand of Halbert as he separated from him.

The young heir of Glendearg was in the meanwhile conducted to a plot
of ground more raised, and therefore drier than the rest of the moor.
Here a carpet was flung on the ground by way of table-cloth, and
around it sat the leaders of the party, partaking of an entertainment
as coarse, with relation to their rank, as that which Glendinning had
so lately shared.  Murray himself rose as he came forward, and
advanced a step to meet him.

This celebrated person had in his appearance, as well as in his mind,
much of the admirable qualities of James V. his father. Had not the
stain of illegitimacy rested upon his birth, he would have filled the
Scottish throne with as much honour as any of the Stewart race. But
History, while she acknowledges his high talents, and much that was
princely, nay, royal, in his conduct, cannot forget that ambition led
him farther than honour or loyalty warranted. Brave amongst the
bravest, fair in presence and in favour, skilful to manage the most
intricate affairs, to attach to himself those who were doubtful, to
stun and overwhelm, by the suddenness and intrepidity of his
enterprises, those who were resolute in resistance, he attained, and
as to personal merit certainly deserved, the highest place in the
kingdom. But he abused, under the influence of strong temptation, the
opportunities which his sister Mary's misfortunes and imprudence threw
in his way; he supplanted his sovereign and benefactress in her power,
and his history affords us one of those mixed characters, in which
principle was so often sacrificed to policy, that we must condemn the
statesman while we pity and regret the individual. Many events in his
life gave likelihood to the charge that he himself aimed at the crown;
and it is too true, that he countenanced the fatal expedient of
establishing an English, that is a foreign and a hostile interest, in
the councils of Scotland. But his death may be received as an
atonement for his offences, and may serve to show how much more safe
is the person of a real patriot, than that of the mere head of a
faction, who is accounted answerable for the offences of his meanest
attendants.

When Murray approached, the young rustic was naturally abashed at the
dignity of his presence. The commanding form and the countenance to
which high and important thoughts were familiar, the features which
bore the resemblance of Scotland's long line of kings, were well
calculated to impress awe and reverence. His dress had little to
distinguish him from the high-born nobles and barons by whom he was
attended. A buff-coat, richly embroidered with silken lace, supplied
the place of armour; and a massive gold chain, with its medal, hung
round his neck. His black velvet bonnet was decorated with a string of
large and fair pearls, and with a small tufted feather; a long heavy
sword was girt to his side, as the familiar companion of his hand. He
wore gilded spurs on his boots, and these completed his equipment.

"This letter," he said, "is from the godly preacher of the word, Henry
Warden, young man? is it not so?" Halbert answered in the affirmative.
"And he writes to us, it would seem, in some strait, and refers us to
you for the circumstances. Let us know, I pray you, how things stand
with him."

In some perturbation Halbert Glendinning gave an account of the
circumstances which had accompanied the preacher's imprisonment. When
he came to the discussion of the _handfasting_ engagement, he was
struck with the ominous and displeased expression of Murray's brows,
and, contrary to all prudential and politic rule, seeing something was
wrong, yet not well aware what that something was, had almost stopped
short in his narrative.

"What ails the fool?" said the Earl, drawing his dark-red eyebrows
together, while the same dusky glow kindled on his brow--"Hast thou not
learned to tell a true tale without stammering?"

"So please you," answered Halbert, with considerable address, "I have
never before spoken in such a presence."

"He seems a modest youth," said Murray, turning to his next attendant,
"and yet one who in a good cause will neither fear friend nor
foe.--Speak on, friend, and speak freely."

Halbert then gave an account of the quarrel betwixt Julian Avenel and
the preacher, which the Earl, biting his lip the while, compelled
himself to listen to as a thing of indifference. At first he appeared
even to take the part of the Baron.

"Henry Warden," he said, "is too hot in his zeal. The law both of God
and man maketh allowance for certain alliances, though not strictly
formal, and the issue of such may succeed."

This general declaration he expressed, accompanying it with a glance
around upon the few followers who were present at this interview. The
most of them answered--"There is no contravening that;" but one or two
looked on the ground, and were silent. Murray then turned again to
Glendinning, commanding him to say what next chanced, and not to omit
any particular. When he mentioned the manner in which Julian had cast
from him his concubine, Murray drew a deep breath, set his teeth hard,
and laid his hand on the hilt of his dagger. Casting his eyes once
more around the circle, which was now augmented by one or two of the
reformed preachers, he seemed to devour his rage in silence, and again
commanded Halbert to proceed. When he came to describe how Warden had
been dragged to a dungeon, the Earl seemed to have found the point at
which he might give vent to his own resentment, secure of the sympathy
and approbation of all who were present. "Judge you," he said, looking
to those around him, "judge you, my peers, and noble gentlemen of
Scotland, betwixt me and this Julian Avenel--he hath broken his own
word, and hath violated my safe-conduct--and judge you also, my
reverend brethren, he hath put his hand forth upon a preacher of the
gospel, and perchance may sell his blood to the worshippers of
Anti-Christ!"

"Let him die the death of a traitor," said the secular chiefs, "and
let his tongue be struck through with the hangman's fiery iron to
avenge his perjury!"

"Let him go down to his place with Baal's priests," said the preachers,
"and be his ashes cast into Tophet!"

Murray heard them with the smile of expected revenge; yet it is
probable that the brutal treatment of the female, whose circumstances
somewhat resembled those of the Earl's own mother, had its share in
the grim smile which curled his sun-burnt cheek and its haughty lip.
To Halbert Glendinning, when his narrative was finished, he spoke with
great kindness.

"He is a bold and gallant youth," said he to those around, "and formed
of the stuff which becomes a bustling time. There are periods when men's
spirits shine bravely through them. I will know something more of him."

He questioned him more particularly concerning the Baron of Avenel's
probable forces--the strength of his castle--the dispositions of his
next heir, and this brought necessarily forward the sad history of his
brother's daughter, Mary Avenel, which was told with an embarrassment
that did not escape Murray.

"Ha! Julian Avenel," he said, "and do you provoke my resentment, when
you have so much more reason to deprecate my justice! I knew Walter
Avenel, a true Scotsman and a good soldier. Our sister, the Queen,
must right his daughter; and were her land restored, she would be a
fitting bride to some brave man who may better merit our favour than
the traitor Julian."--Then looking at Halbert, he said, "Art thou of
gentle blood, young man?"

Halbert, with a faltering and uncertain voice, began to speak of his
distant pretensions to claim a descent from the ancient Glendonwynes
of Galloway, when Murray interrupted him with a smile.

"Nay--nay--leave pedigrees to bards and heralds. In our days, each,
man is the son of his own deeds. The glorious light of reformation
hath shone alike on prince and peasant; and peasant as well as prince
may be illustrated by fighting in its defence. It is a stirring world,
where all may advance themselves who have stout hearts and strong
arms. Tell me frankly why thou hast left thy father's house."

Halbert Glendinning made a frank confession of his duel with Piercie
Shafton, and mentioned his supposed death.

"By my hand," said Murray, "thou art a bold sparrow-hawk, to match
thee so early with such a kite as Piercie Shafton. Queen Elizabeth
would give her glove filled with gold crowns to know that meddling
coxcomb to be under the sod.--Would she not, Morton?"

"Ay, by my word, and esteem her glove a better gift than the crowns,"
replied Morton, "which few Border lads like this fellow will esteem
just valuation."

"But what shall we do with this young homicide?" said Murray; "what
will our preachers say?"

"Tell them of Moses and of Benaiah," said Morton; "it is but the smiting
of an Egyptian when all is said out."

"Let it be so," said Murray, laughing; "but we will bury the tale, as
the prophet did the body, in the sand. I will take care of this
swankie.--Be near to us, Glendinning, since that is thy name. We
retain thee as a squire of our household. The master of our horse will
see thee fully equipped and armed."

During the expedition which he was now engaged in, Murray found
several opportunities of putting Glendinning's courage and presence of
mind to the test, and he began to rise so rapidly in his esteem, that
those who knew the Earl considered the youth's fortune as certain. One
step only was wanting to raise him to a still higher degree of
confidence and favour--it was the abjuration of the Popish religion.
The ministers who attended upon Murray and formed his chief support
amongst the people, found an easy convert in Halbert Glendinning, who,
from his earliest days, had never felt much devotion towards the
Catholic faith, and who listened eagerly to more reasonable views of
religion. By thus adopting the faith of his master, he rose higher in
his favour, and was constantly about his person during his prolonged
stay in the west of Scotland, which the intractability of those whom
the Earl had to deal with, protracted from day to day, and week to
week.




Chapter the Thirty-Sixth.


  Faint the din of battle bray'd
    Distant down the hollow wind;
  War and terror fled before,
    Wounds and death were left behind.
                      PENROSE.

The autumn of the year was well advanced, when the Earl of Morton,
one morning, rather unexpectedly, entered the antechamber of Murray, in
which Halbert Glendinning was in waiting.

"Call your master, Halbert," said the Earl; "I have news for him from
Teviotdale; and for you too, Glendinning.--News! news! my Lord of
Murray!" he exclaimed at the door of the Earl's bedroom; "come forth
instantly." The Earl appeared, and greeted his ally, demanding eagerly
his tidings.

"I have had a sure friend with me from the south," said Morton; "he
has been at Saint Mary's Monastery, and brings important tidings." "Of
what complexion?" said Murray, "and can you trust the bearer?" "He is
faithful, on my life," said Morton; "I wish all around your Lordship
may prove equally so."

"At what, and whom, do you point?" demanded Murray.

"Here is the Egyptian of trusty Halbert Glendinning, our Southland
Moses, come alive again, and flourishing, gay and bright as ever, in
that Teviotdale Goshen, the Halidome of Kennaquhair."

"What mean you, my lord?" said Murray.

"Only that your new henchman has put a false tale upon you. Piercie
Shafton is alive and well; by the same token that the gull is thought
to be detained there by love to a miller's daughter, who roamed the
country with him in disguise."

"Glendinning," said Murray, bending his brow into his darkest frown,
"thou hast not, I trust, dared to bring me a lie in thy mouth, in
order to win my confidence?"

"My lord," said Halbert, "I am incapable of a lie. I should choke on
one were my life to require that I pronounced it. I say, that this
sword of my father was through the body--the point came out behind his
back--the hilt pressed upon his breast-bone. And I will plunge it as
deep in the body of any one who shall dare to charge me with
falsehood."

"How, fellow!" said Morton, "wouldst thou beard a nobleman?"

"Be silent, Halbert," said Murray, "and you, my Lord of Morton, forbear
him. I see truth written on his brow."

"I wish the inside of the manuscript may correspond with the
superscription," replied his more suspicious ally. "Look to it, my
lord, you will one day lose your life by too much confidence."

"And you will lose your friends by being too readily suspicious,"
answered Murray. "Enough of this--let me hear thy tidings."

"Sir John Foster," said Morton, "is about to send a party into Scotland
to waste the Halidome."

"How! without waiting my presence and permission?" said Murray--"he is
mad--will he come as an enemy into the Queen's country?"

"He has Elizabeth's express orders," answered Morton, "and they are
not to be trifled with. Indeed, his march has been more than once
projected and laid aside during the time we have been here, and has
caused much alarm at Kennaquhair. Boniface, the old Abbot, has
resigned, and whom think you they have chosen in his place?"

"No one surely," said Murray; "they would presume to hold no election
until the Queen's pleasure and mine were known?"

Morton shrugged his shoulders--"They have chosen the pupil of old
Cardinal Beatoun, that wily determined champion of Rome, the
bosom-friend of our busy Primate of Saint Andrews. Eustace, late the
Sub-Prior of Kennaquhair, is now its Abbot, and, like a second Pope
Julius, is levying men and making musters to fight with Foster if he
comes forward."

"We must prevent that meeting," said Murray, hastily; "whichever
party wins the day, it were a fatal encounter for us--Who commands the
troop of the Abbot?"

"Our faithful old friend, Julian Avenel, nothing less," answered Morton.

"Glendinning," said Murray, "sound trumpets to horse directly, and let
all who love us get on horseback without delay--Yes, my lord, this
were indeed a fatal dilemma. If we take part with our English friends,
the country will cry shame on us--the very old wives will attack us
with their rocks and spindles--the very stones of the street will rise
up against us--we cannot set our face to such a deed of infamy. And my
sister, whose confidence I already have such difficulty in preserving,
will altogether withdraw it from me. Then, were we to oppose the
English Warden, Elizabeth would call it a protecting of her enemies
and what not, and we should lose her."

"The she-dragon," said Morton, "is the best card in our pack; and yet
I would not willingly stand still and see English blades carve Scots
flesh--What say you to loitering by the way, marching far and easy for
fear of spoiling our horses? They might then fight dog fight bull,
fight Abbot fight archer, and no one could blame us for what chanced
when we were not present."

"All would blame us, James Douglas," replied Murray; "we should lose
both sides--we had better advance with the utmost celerity, and do
what we can to keep the peace betwixt them.--I would the nag that
brought Piercie Shafton hither had broken his neck over the highest
heuch in Northumberland!--He is a proper coxcomb to make all this
bustle about, and to occasion perhaps a national war!"

"Had we known in time," said Douglas, "we might have had him privily
waited upon as he entered the Borders; there are strapping lads enough
would have rid us of him for the lucre of his spur-whang.  [Footnote:
_Spur-whang_--Spur-leather.] But to the saddle, James Stewart, since
so the phrase goes. I hear your trumpets. Bound to horse and away--we
shall soon see which nag is best breathed."

Followed by a train of about three hundred well-mounted men-at-arms,
these two powerful barons directed their course to Dumfries, and from
thence eastward to Teviotdale, marching at a rate which, as Morton had
foretold, soon disabled a good many of their horses, so that when they
approached the scene of expected action, there were not above two
hundred of their train remaining in a body, and of these most were
mounted on steeds which had been sorely jaded.

They had hitherto been amused and agitated by various reports
concerning the advance of the English soldiers, and the degree of
resistance which the Abbot was able to oppose to them. But when they
were six or seven miles from Saint Mary's of Kennaquhair, a gentleman
of the country, whom Murray had summoned to attend him, and on whose
intelligence he knew he could rely, arrived at the head of two or
three servants, "bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste."
According to his report, Sir John Foster, after several times
announcing, and as often delaying, his intended incursion, had at last
been so stung with the news that Piercie Shafton was openly residing
within the Halidome, that he determined to execute the commands of his
mistress, which directed him, at every risk, to make himself master of
the Euphuist's person. The Abbot's unceasing exertions had collected a
body of men almost equal in number to those of the English Warden, but
less practised in arms. They were united under the command of Julian
Avenel, and it was apprehended they would join battle upon the banks
of a small stream which forms the verge of the Halidome.

"Who knows the place?" said Murray.

"I do, my lord," answered Glendinning.

"'Tis well," said the Earl; "take a score of the best-mounted
horse--make what haste thou canst, and announce to them that I am
coming up instantly with a strong power, and will cut to pieces,
without mercy, whichever party strikes the first blow.--Davidson,"
said he to the gentleman who brought the intelligence, "thou shalt be
my guide.--Hie thee on, Glendinning--Say to Foster, I conjure him, as
he respects his mistress's service, that he will leave the matter in
my hands. Say to the Abbot, I will burn the Monastery over his head,
if he strikes a stroke till I come--Tell the dog, Julian Avenel, that
he hath already one deep score to settle with me--I will set his head
on the top of the highest pinnacle of Saint Mary's, if he presume to
open another. Make haste, and spare not the spur for fear of spoiling
horse-flesh."

"Your bidding shall be obeyed, my lord," said Glendinning; and
choosing those whose horses were in best plight to be his attendants,
he went off as fast as the jaded state of their cavalry permitted.
Hill and hollow vanished from under the feet of the chargers.

They had not ridden half the way, when they met stragglers coming off
from the field, whose appearance announced that the conflict was
begun.  Two supported in their arms a third, their elder brother, who
was pierced with an arrow through the body. Halbert, who knew them to
belong to the Halidome, called them by their names, and questioned
them of the state of the affray; but just then, in spite of their
efforts to retain him in the saddle, their brother dropped from the
horse, and they dismounted in haste to receive his last breath. From
men thus engaged, no information was to be obtained. Glendinning,
therefore, pushed on with his little troop, the more anxiously, as he
perceived other stragglers, bearing Saint Andrew's cross upon their
caps and corslets, flying apparently from the field of battle.  Most
of these, when they were aware of a body of horsemen approaching on
the road, held to the one hand or the other, at such a distance as
precluded coming to speech of them. Others, whose fear was more
intense, kept the onward road, galloping wildly as fast as their
horses could carry them, and when questioned, only glared without
reply on those who spoke to them, and rode on without drawing bridle.
Several of these were also known to Halbert, who had therefore no
doubt, from the circumstances in which he met them, that the men of
the Halidome were defeated. He became now unspeakably anxious
concerning the fate of his brother, who, he could not doubt, must have
been engaged in the affray. He therefore increased the speed of his
horse, so that not above five or six of his followers could keep up
with him. At length he reached a little hill, at the descent of which,
surrounded by a semi-circular sweep of a small stream, lay the plain
which had been the scene of the skirmish.

It was a melancholy spectacle. War and terror, to use the expression
of the poet, had rushed on to the field, and left only wounds and
death behind them. The battle had been stoutly contested, as was
almost always the case with these Border skirmishes, where ancient
hatred, and mutual injuries, made men stubborn in maintaining the
cause of their conflict.  Towards the middle of the plain, there lay
the bodies of several men who had fallen in the very act of grappling
with the enemy; and there were seen countenances which still bore the
stern expression of unextinguishable hate and defiance, hands which
clasped the hilt of the broken falchion, or strove in vain to pluck
the deadly arrow from the wound. Some were wounded, and, cowed of the
courage they had lately shown, were begging aid, and craving water, in
a tone of melancholy depression, while others tried to teach the
faltering tongue to pronounce some half-forgotten prayer, which, even
when first learned, they had but half understood. Halbert, uncertain
what course he was next to pursue, rode through the plain to see if,
among the dead or wounded, he could discover any traces of his brother
Edward. He experienced no interruption from the English. A distant
cloud of dust announced that they were still pursuing the scattered
fugitives, and he guessed, that to approach them with his followers,
until they were again under some command, would be to throw away his
own life, and that of his men, whom the victors would instantly
confound with the Scots, against whom they had been successful. He
resolved, therefore, to pause until Murray came up with his forces, to
which he was the more readily moved, as he heard the trumpets of the
English Warden sounding the retreat, and recalling from the pursuit.
He drew his men together, and made a stand in an advantageous spot of
ground, which had been occupied by the Scots in the beginning of the
action, and most fiercely disputed while the skirmish lasted.

While he stood here, Halbert's ear was assailed by the feeble moan of
a woman, which he had not expected to hear amid that scene, until the
retreat of the foes had permitted the relations of the slain to
approach, for the purpose of paying them the last duties. He looked
with anxiety, and at length observed, that by the body of a knignt in
bright armour, whose crest, though soiled and broken, still showed the
marks of rank and birth, there sat a female wrapped in a horseman's
cloak, and holding something pressed against her bosom, which he soon
discovered to be a child. He glanced towards the English. They
advanced not, and the continued and prolonged sound of their trumpets,
with the shouts of the leaders, announced that their powers would not
be instantly re-assembled. He had, therefore, a moment to look after
this unfortunate woman. He gave his horse to a spearman as he
dismounted, and, approaching the unhappy female, asked her, in the
most soothing tone he could assume, whether he could assist her in her
distress. The mourner made him no direct answer; but endeavouring,
with a trembling and unskilful hand, to undo the springs of the visor
and gorget, said, in a tone of impatient grief, "Oh, he would recover
instantly could I but give him air--land and living, life and honour,
would I give for the power of undoing these cruel iron platings that
suffocate him!" He that would soothe sorrow must not argue on the
vanity of the most deceitful hopes. The body lay as that of one whose
last draught of vital air had been drawn, and who must never more have
concern with the nether sky. But Halbert Glendinning failed not to
raise the visor and cast loose the gorget, when, to his great
surprise, he recognized the pale face of Julian Avenel. His last fight
was over, the fierce and turbid spirit had departed in the strife in
which it had so long delighted.

"Alas! he is gone," said Halbert, speaking to the young woman, in whom
he had now no difficulty of knowing the unhappy Catherine.

"Oh, no, no, no!" she reiterated, "do not say so--he is not dead--he
is but in a swoon. I have lain as long in one myself--and then his
voice would arouse me, when he spoke kindly, and said, Catherine, look
up for my sake--And look up, Julian, for mine!" she said, addressing
the senseless corpse; "I know you do but counterfeit to frighten me,
but I am not frightened," she added, with an hysterical attempt to
laugh; and then instantly changing her tone, entreated him to "speak,
were it but to curse my folly.  Oh, the rudest word you ever said to
me would now sound like the dearest you wasted on me before I gave you
all. Lift him up," she said, "lift him up, for God's sake!--have you
no compassion? He promised to wed me if I bore him a boy, and this
child is so like to its father!--How shall he keep his word, if you do
not help me to awaken him?--Christie of the Clinthill, Rowley,
Hutcheon! ye were constant at his feast, but ye fled from him at the
fray, false villains as ye are!"

"Not I, by Heaven!" said a dying man, who made some shift to raise
himself on his elbow, and discovered to Halbert the well-known
features of Christie; "I fled not a foot, and a man can but fight
while his breath lasts--mine is going fast.--So, youngster," said he,
looking at Glendinning, and seeing his military dress, "thou hast
ta'en the basnet at last? it is a better cap to live in than die in. I
would chance had sent thy brother here instead--there was good in
him--but thou art as wild, and wilt soon be as wicked as myself."

"God forbid!" said Halbert, hastily.

"Marry, and amen, with all my heart," said the wounded man, "there
will be company enow without thee where I am going. But God be praised
I had no hand in that wickedness," said he, looking to poor Catherine;
and with some exclamation in his mouth, that sounded betwixt a prayer
and a curse, the soul of Christie of the Clinthill took wing to the
last account.

Deeply wrapt in the painful interest which these shocking events had
excited, Glendinning forgot for a moment his own situation and duties,
and was first recalled to them by a trampling of horse, and the cry of
Saint George for England, which the English soldiers still continued
to use. His handful of men, for most of the stragglers had waited for
Murray's coming up, remained on horseback, holding their lances
upright, having no command either to submit or resist.

"There stands our Captain," said one of them, as a strong party of
English came up, the vanguard of Foster's troop.

"Your Captain! with his sword sheathed, and on foot in the presence of
his enemy? a raw soldier, I warrant him," said the English leader.
"So! ho! young man, is your dream out, and will you now answer me if
you will fight or fly?"

"Neither," answered Halbert Glendinning, with great tranquillity.

"Then throw down thy sword and yield thee," answered the Englishman.

"Not till I can help myself no otherwise," said Halbert, with the same
moderation of tone and manner.

"Art thou for thine own hand, friend, or to whom dost thou owe
service?" demanded the English Captain.

"To the noble Earl of Murray."

"Then thou servest," said the Southron, "the most disloyal nobleman
who breathes--false both to England and Scotland."

"Thou liest," said Glendinning, regardless of all consequences.

"Ha! art thou so hot how, and wert so cold but a minute since? I lie,
do I? Wilt thou do battle with me on that quarrel?"

"With one to one--one to two--or two to five, as you list," said
Halbert Glendinning; "grant me but a fair field."

"That thou shalt have.--Stand back, my mates," said the brave
Englishman. "If I fall, give him fair play, and let him go off free
with his people."

"Long life to the noble Captain!" cried the soldiers, as impatient to
see the duel, as if it had been a bull-baiting.

"He will have a short life of it, though," said the sergeant, "if he,
an old man of sixty, is to fight, for any reason, or for no reason,
with every man he meets, and especially the young fellows he might be
father to.--And here comes the Warden besides to see the sword-play."

In fact, Sir John Foster came up with a considerable body of his
horsemen, just as his Captain, whose age rendered him unequal to the
combat with so strong and active a youth as Glendinning, was deprived
of his sword.

"Take it up for shame, old Stawarth Bolton," said the English Warden;
"and thou, young man, tell me who and what thou art?"

"A follower of the Earl of Murray, who bore his will to your honour,"
answered Glendinning,--"but here he comes to say it himself; I see the
van of his horsemen come over the hills."

"Get into order, my masters," said Sir John Foster to his followers;
"you that have broken your spears, draw your swords. We are something
unprovided for a second field, but if yonder dark cloud on the hill
edge bring us foul weather, we must bear as bravely as our broken
cloaks will bide it.  Meanwhile, Stawarth, we have got the deer we
have hunted for--here is Piercie Shafton hard and fast betwixt two
troopers."

"Who, that lad?" said Bolton; "he is no more Piercie Shafton than I
am. He hath his gay cloak indeed--but Piercie Shafton is a round dozen
of years older than that slip of roguery. I have known him since he
was thus high. Did you never see him in the tilt-yard or in the
presence?"

"To the devil with such vanities!" said Sir John Foster; "when had I
leisure for them or any thing else? During my whole life has she kept
me to this hangman's office, chasing thieves one day and traitors
another, in daily fear of my life; the lance never hung up in the
hall, the foot never out of the stirrup, the saddles never off my
nags' backs; and now, because I have been mistaken in the person of a
man I never saw, I warrant me, the next letters from the Privy Council
will rate me as I were a dog--a man were better dead than thus slaved
and harassed."

A trumpet interrupted Foster's complaints, and a Scottish pursuivant
who attended, declared "that the noble Earl of Murray desired, in all
honour and safety, a personal conference with Sir John Foster, midway
between their parties, with six of company in each, and ten free
minutes to come and go."

"And now," said the Englishman, "comes another plague. I must go speak
with yonder false Scot, and he knows how to frame his devices, to cast
dust in the eyes of a plain man, as well as ever a knave in the north.
I am no match for him in words, and for hard blows we are but too ill
provided.--Pursuivant, we grant the conference--and you, Sir
Swordsman," (speaking to young Glendinning,) "draw off with your
troopers to your own party--march--attend your Earl's
trumpet.--Stawarth Bolton, put our troop in order, and be ready to
move forward at the wagging of a finger.--Get you gone to your own
friends, I tell you, Sir Squire, and loiter not here."

Notwithstanding this peremptory order, Halbert Glendinning could not
help stopping to cast a look upon the unfortunate Catherine, who lay
insensible of the danger and of the trampling of so many horses around
her, insensible, as the second glance assured him, of all and forever.
Glendinning almost rejoiced when he saw that the last misery of life
was over, and that the hoofs of the war-horses, amongst which he was
compelled to leave her, could only injure and deface a senseless
corpse. He caught the infant from her arms, half ashamed of the shout
of laughter which rose on all sides, at seeing an armed man in such a
situation assume such an unwonted and inconvenient burden.

"Shoulder your infant!" cried a harquebusier.

"Port your infant!" said a pikeman.

"Peace, ye brutes," said Stawarth Bolton, "and respect humanity in
others if you have none yourselves. I pardon the lad having done some
discredit to my gray hairs, when I see him take care of that helpless
creature, which ye would have trampled upon as if ye had been littered
of bitch-wolves, not born of women."

While this passed, the leaders on either side met in the neutral space
betwixt the forces of either, and the Earl accosted the English
Warden:

"Is this fair or honest usage, Sir John, or for whom do you hold the
Earl of Morton and myself, that you ride in Scotland with arrayed
banner, fight, slay, and make prisoners at your own pleasure? Is it
well done, think you, to spoil our land and shed our blood, after the
many proofs we have given to your mistress of our devotion due to her
will, saving always the allegiance due to our own sovereign?"

"My Lord of Murray," answered Foster, "all the world knows you to be a
man of quick ingine and deep wisdom, and these several weeks you have
held me in hand with promising to arrest my sovereign mistress's
rebel, this Piercie Shafton of Wilverton, and you have never kept your
word, alleging turmoils in the west, and I wot not what other causes
of hinderance. Now, since he has had the insolence to return hither,
and live openly within ten miles of England, I could no longer, in
plain duty to my mistress and queen, tarry upon your successive
delays, and therefore I have used her force to take her rebel, by the
strong hand, wherever I can find him."

"And is Piercie Shafton in your hands, then?" said the Earl of Murray.
"Be aware that I may not, without my own great shame, suffer you to
remove him hence without doing battle."

"Will you, Lord Earl, after all the advantages you have received at the
hands of the Queen of England, do battle in the cause of her rebel?" said
Sir John Foster.

"Not so, Sir John," answered the Earl, "but I will fight to the death in
defence of the liberties of our free kingdom of Scotland."

"By my faith," said Sir John Foster, "I am well content--my sword is
not blunted with all it has done yet this day."

"By my honour, Sir John," said Sir George Heron of Chipchase, "there
is but little reason we should fight these Scottish Lords e'en now,
for I hold opinion with old Stawarth Bolton, and believe yonder
prisoner to be no more Piercie Shafton than he is the Earl of
Northumberland; and you were but ill advised to break the peace
betwixt the countries for a prisoner of less consequence than that gay
mischief-maker."

"Sir George," replied Foster, "I have often heard you herons are
afraid of hawks--Nay, lay not hand on sword, man--I did but jest; and
for this prisoner, let him be brought up hither, that we may see who
or what he is--always under assurance, my Lords," he continued,
addressing the Scots.

"Upon our word and honour," said Morton, "we will offer no violence."

The laugh turned against Sir John Foster considerably, when the
prisoner, being brought up, proved not only a different person from
Sir Piercie Shafton, but a female in man's attire.

"Pluck the mantle from the quean's face, and cast her to the horse-boys,"
said Foster; "she has kept such company ere now, I warrant."

Even Murray was moved to laughter, no common thing with him, at the
disappointment of the English Warden; but he would not permit any
violence to be offered to the fair Molinara, who had thus a second
time rescued Sir Piercie Shafton at her own personal risk.

"You have already done more mischief than you can well answer," said
the Earl to the English Warden, "and it were dishonour to me should I
permit you to harm a hair of this young woman's head."

"My lord," said Morton, "if Sir John will ride apart with me but for
one moment, I will show him such reasons as shall make him content to
depart, and to refer this unhappy day's work to the judgment of the
Commissioners nominated to try offences on the Border."

He then led Sir John Foster aside, and spoke to him in this
manner:--"Sir John Foster, I much marvel that a man who knows your
Queen Elizabeth as you do, should not know that, if you hope any thing
from her, it must be for doing her useful service, not for involving
her in quarrels with her neighbours without any advantage. Sir Knight,
I will speak frankly what I know to be true. Had you seized the true
Piercie Shafton by this ill-advised inroad; and had your deed
threatened, as most likely it might, a breach betwixt the countries,
your politic princess and her politic council would rather have
disgraced Sir John Foster than entered into war in his behalf. But now
that you have stricken short of your aim, you may rely on it you will
have little thanks for carrying the matter farther. I will work thus
far on the Earl of Murray, that he will undertake to dismiss Sir
Piercie Shafton from the realm of Scotland.--Be well advised, and let
the matter now pass off--you will gain nothing by farther violence,
for if we fight, you as the fewer and the weaker through your former
action, will needs have the worse."

Sir John Foster listened with his head declining on his breast-plate.

"It is a cursed chance," he said, "and I shall have little thanks for
my day's work."

He then rode up to Murray, and said, that, in deference to his Lordship's
presence and that of my Lord of Morton, he had come to the resolution of
withdrawing himself, with his power, without farther proceedings.

"Stop there, Sir John Foster," said Murray; "I cannot permit you to
retire in safety, unless you leave some one who may be surety to
Scotland, that the injuries you have at present done us may be fully
accounted for--you will reflect, that by permitting your retreat, I
become accountable to my Sovereign, who will demand a reckoning of me
for the blood of her subjects, if I suffer those who shed it to depart
so easily."

"It shall never be told in England," said the Warden, "that John
Foster gave pledges like a subdued man, and that on the very field on
which he stands victorious.--But," he added, after a moment's pause,
"if Stawarth Bolton wills to abide with you on his own free choice, I
will say nothing against it; and, as I bethink me, it were better he
should stay to see the dismissal of this same Piercie Shafton."

"I receive him as your hostage, nevertheless, and shall treat him as
such," said the Earl of Murray. But Foster, turning away as if to give
directions to Bolton and his men, affected not to hear this
observation.

"There rides a faithful servant of his most beautiful and Sovereign
Lady," said Murray aside to Morton. "Happy man! he knows not whether
the execution of her commands may not cost him his head; and yet he is
most certain that to leave them unexecuted will bring disgrace and
death without reprieve. Happy are they who are not only subjected to
the caprices of Dame Fortune, but held bound to account and be
responsible for them, and that to a sovereign as moody and fickle as
her humorous ladyship herself!"

"We also have a female Sovereign, my lord," said Morton.

"We have so, Douglas," said the Earl,--with a suppressed sigh; "but it
remains to be seen how long a female hand can hold the reins of power
in a realm so wild as ours. We will now go on to Saint Mary's, and see
ourselves after the state of that House.--Glendinning, look to that
woman, and protect her.--What the fiend, man, hast thou got in thine
arms?--an infant as I live!--where couldst thou find such a charge, at
such a place and moment?"

Halbert Glendinning briefly told the story. The Earl rode forward to
the place where the body of Julian Avenel lay, with his unhappy
companion's arms wrapped around him like the trunk of an uprooted oak
borne down by the tempest with all its ivy garlands. Both were cold
dead. Murray was touched in an unwonted degree, remembering, perhaps,
his own birth. "What have they to answer for, Douglas," he said, "who
thus abuse the sweetest gifts of affection?"

The Earl of Morton, unhappy in his marriage, was a libertine in his
amours.

"You must ask that question of Henry Warden, my lord, or of John
Knox--I am but a wild counsellor in women's matters."

"Forward to Saint Mary's," said the Earl; "pass the word
on--Glendinning, give the infant to this same female cavalier, and let
it be taken charge of. Let no dishonour be done to the dead bodies,
and call on the country to bury or remove them.--Forward, I say, my
masters!"




Chapter the Thirty-Seventh.


  Gone to be married?--Gone to swear a peace!

KING JOHN

The news of the lost battle, so quickly carried by the fugitives to
the village and convent, had spread the greatest alarm among the
inhabitants.  The Sacristan and other monks counselled flight; the
Treasurer recommended that the church plate should be offered as a
tribute to bribe the English officer; the Abbot alone was unmoved and
undaunted.

"My brethren," he said, "since God has not given our people victory in
the combat, it must be because he requires of us, his spiritual
soldiers, to fight the good fight of martyrdom, a conflict in which
nothing but our own faint-hearted cowardice can make us fail of
victory. Let us assume, then, the armour of faith, and prepare, if it
be necessary, to die under the ruin of these shrines, to the service
of which we have devoted ourselves. Highly honoured are we all in this
distinguished summons, from our dear brother Nicholas, whose gray
hairs have been preserved until they should be surrounded by the crown
of martyrdom, down to my beloved son Edward, who, arriving at the
vineyard at the latest hour of the day, is yet permitted to share its
toils with those who have laboured from the morning. Be of good
courage, my children. I dare not, like my sainted predecessors,
promise to you that you shall be preserved by miracle--I and you are
alike unworthy of that especial interposition, which, in earlier
times, turned the sword of sacrilege against the bosom of tyrants by
whom it was wielded, daunted the hardened hearts of heretics with
prodigies, and called down hosts of angels to defend the shrine of God
and of the Virgin. Yet, by heavenly aid, you shall this day see that
your Father and Abbot will not disgrace the mitre which sits upon his
brow. Go to your cells, my children, and exercise your private
devotions. Array yourselves also in alb and cope, as for our most
solemn festivals, and be ready, when the tolling of the largest bell
announces the approach of the enemy, to march forth to meet them in
solemn procession. Let the church be opened to afford such refuge as
may be to those of our vassals, who, from their exertion in this day's
unhappy battle, or the cause, are particularly apprehensive of the
rage of the enemy.  Tell Sir Piercie Shafton, if he has escaped the
fight--"

"I am here, most venerable Abbot," replied Sir Piercie; "and if it so
seemeth meet to you, I will presently assemble such of the men as have
escaped this escaramouche, and will renew the resistance, even unto
the death. Certes, you will learn from all, that I did my part in this
unhappy matter. Had it pleased Julian Avenel to have attended to my
counsel, specially in somewhat withdrawing of his main battle, even as
you may have marked the heron eschew the stoop of the falcon,
receiving him rather upon his beak than upon his wing, affairs, as I
do conceive, might have had a different face, and we might then, in a
more bellacose manner, have maintained that affray. Nevertheless, I
would not be understood to speak any thing in disregard of Julian
Avenel, whom I saw fall fighting manfully with his face to his enemy,
which hath banished from my memory the unseemly term of 'meddling
coxcomb,' with which it pleased him something rashly to qualify my
advice, and for which, had it pleased Heaven and the saints to have
prolonged the life of that excellent person, I had it bound upon my
soul to have put him to death with my own hand."

"Sir Piercie," said the Abbot, at length interrupting him, "our time
allows brief leisure to speak what might have been."

"You are right, most venerable Lord and Father," replied the
incorrigible Euphuist; "the preterite, as grammarians have it,
concerns frail mortality less than the future mood, and indeed our
cogitations respect chiefly the present. In a word, I am willing to
head all who will follow me, and offer such opposition as manhood and
mortality may permit, to the advance of the English, though they be my
own countrymen; and be assured, Piercie Shafton will measure his
length, being five feet ten inches, on the ground as he stands, rather
than give two yards in retreat, according to the usual motion in which
we retrograde."

"I thank you, Sir Knight," said the Abbot, "and I doubt not that you
would make your words good; but it is not the will of Heaven that carnal
weapons should rescue us. We are called to endure, not to resist, and may
not waste the blood of our innocent commons in vain--Fruitless opposition
becomes not men of our profession; they have my commands to resign the
sword and the spear,--God and Our Lady have not blessed our banner."

"Bethink you, reverend lord," said Piercie Shafton, very eagerly, "ere
you resign the defence that is in your power--there are many posts
near the entry of this village, where brave men might live or die to
the advantage; and I have this additional motive to make defence,--the
safety, namely, of a fair friend, who, I hope, hath escaped the hands
of the heretics."

"I understand you, Sir Piercie," said the Abbot--"you mean the
daughter of our Convent's miller?"

"Reverend my lord," said Sir Piercie, not without hesitation, "the
fair Mysinda is, as may be in some sort alleged, the daughter of one
who mechanically prepareth corn to be manipulated into bread, without
which we could not exist, and which is therefore an employment in
itself honourable, nay necessary. Nevertheless, if the purest
sentiments of a generous mind, streaming forth like the rays of the
sun reflected by a diamond, may ennoble one, who is in some sort the
daughter of a molendinary mechanic----"

"I have no time for all this, Sir Knight," said the Abbot; "be it
enough to answer, that with our will we war no longer with carnal
weapons. We of the spirituality will teach you of the temporality how
to die in cold blood, our hands not clenched for resistance, but
folded for prayer--our minds not filled with jealous hatred, but with
Christian meekness and forgiveness--our ears not deafened, nor our
senses confused, by the sound of clamorous instruments of war; but, on
the contrary, our voices composed to Halleluiah, Kyrie-Eleison, and
Salve Regina, and our blood temperate and cold, as those who think
upon reconciling themselves with God, not of avenging themselves of
their fellow-mortals."

"Lord Abbot," said Sir Piercie, "this is nothing to the fate of my
Molinara, whom I beseech you to observe, I will not abandon, while
golden hilt and steel blade bide together on my falchion. I commanded
her not to follow us to the field, and yet methought I saw her in her
page's attire amongst the rear of the combatants."

"You must seek elsewhere for the person in whose fate you are so
deeply interested," said the Abbot; "and at present I will pray of
your knighthood to inquire concerning her at the church, in which all
our more defenceless vassals have taken refuge. It is my advice to
you, that you also abide by the horns of the altar; and, Sir Piercie
Shafton," he added, "be of one thing secure, that if you come to harm,
it will involve the whole of this brotherhood; for never, I trust,
will the meanest of us buy safety at the expense of surrendering a
friend or a guest. Leave us, my son, and may God be your aid!"

When Sir Piercie Shafton had departed, and the Abbot was about to
betake himself to his own cell, he was surprised by an unknown person
anxiously requiring a conference, who, being admitted, proved to be no
other than Henry Warden. The Abbot started as he entered, and
exclaimed, angrily,--"Ha! are the few hours that fate allows him who
may last wear the mitre of this house, not to be excused from the
intrusion of heresy?  Dost thou come," he said, "to enjoy the hopes
which fete holds out to thy demented and accursed sect, to see the
bosom of destruction sweep away the pride of old religion--to deface
our shrines,--to mutilate and lay waste the bodies of our benefactors,
as well as their sepulchres--to destroy the pinnacles and carved work
of God's house, and Our Lady's?"

"Peace, William Allan!" said the Protestant preacher, with dignified
composure; "for none of these purposes do I come. I would have these
stately shrines deprived of the idols which, no longer simply regarded
as the effigies of the good and of the wise, have become the objects
of foul idolatry.  I would otherwise have its ornaments subsist,
unless as they are, or may be, a snare to the souls of men; and
especially do I condemn those ravages which have been made by the
heady fury of the people, stung into zeal against will-worship by
bloody persecution. Against such wanton devastations I lift my
testimony."

"Idle distinguisher that thou art!" said the Abbot Eustace, interrupting
him; "what signifies the pretext under which thou dost despoil the house
of God? and why at this present emergence will thou insult the master of
it by thy ill-omened presence?"

"Thou art unjust, William Allan," said Warden; "but I am not the less
settled in my resolution. Thou hast protected me some time since at
the hazard of thy rank, and what I know thou holdest still dearer, at
the risk of thy reputation with thine own sect. Our party is now
uppermost, and, believe me, I have come down the valley, in which thou
didst quarter me for sequestration's sake, simply with the wish to
keep my engagements to thee."

"Ay," answered the Abbot, "and it may be, that my listening to that
worldly and infirm compassion which pleaded with me for thy life, is now
avenged by this impending judgment. Heaven hath smitten, it may be,
the erring shepherd, and scattered the flock."

"Think better of the Divine judgments," said Warden. "Not for thy
sins, which are those of thy blended education and circumstances; not for
thine own sins, William Allan, art thou stricken, but for the accumulated
guilt which thy mis-named Church hath accumulated on her head, and those
of her votaries, by the errors and corruption of ages."

"Now, by my sure belief in the Rock of Peter," said the Abbot, "thou
dost rekindle the last spark of human indignation for which my bosom
has fuel--I thought I might not again have felt the impulse of earthly
passion, and it is thy voice which once more calls me to the
expression of human anger! yes, it is thy voice that comest to insult
me in my hour of sorrow, with these blasphemous accusations of that
church which hath kept the light of Christianity alive from the times
of the Apostles till now."

"From the times of the Apostles?" said the preacher, eagerly.
"_Negatur, Gulielme Allan_--the primitive church differed as much
from that of Rome, as did light from darkness, which, did time permit,
I should speedily prove. And worse dost thou judge, in saying, I come
to insult thee in thy hour of affliction, being here, God wot, with
the Christian wish of fulfilling an engagement I had made to my host,
and of rendering myself to thy will while it had yet power to exercise
aught upon me, and if it might so be, to mitigate in thy behalf the
rage of the victors whom God hath sent as a scourge to thy obstinacy."

"I will none of thy intercession," said the Abbot, sternly; "the
dignity to which the church has exalted me, never should have swelled
my bosom more proudly in the time of the highest prosperity, than it
doth at this crisis--I ask nothing of thee, but the assurance that my
lenity to thee hath been the means of perverting no soul to Satan,
that I have not given to the wolf any of the stray lambs whom the
Great Shepherd of souls had intrusted to my charge."

"William Allan," answered the Protestant, "I will be sincere with
thee.  What I promised I have kept--I have withheld my voice from
speaking even good things. But it has pleased Heaven to call the
maiden Mary Avenel to a better sense of faith than thou and all the
disciples of Rome can teach. Her I have aided with my humble power--I
have extricated her from the machinations of evil spirits to which she
and her house were exposed during the blindness of their Romish
superstition, and, praise be to my Master, I have not reason to fear
she will again be caught in thy snares."

"Wretched man!" said the Abbot, unable to suppress his rising
indignation, "is it to the Abbot of St. Mary's that you boast having
misled the soul of a dweller in Our Lady's Halidome into the paths of
foul error and damning heresy?--Thou dost urge me, Wellwood, beyond
what it becomes me to bear, and movest me to employ the few moments of
power I may yet possess, in removing from the face of the earth one
whose qualities, given by God, have been so utterly perverted as thine
to the service of Satan."

"Do thy pleasure," said the preacher; "thy vain wrath shall not
prevent my doing my duty to advantage thee, where it may be done
without neglecting my higher call. I go to the Earl of Murray."

Their conference, which was advancing fast into bitter disputation,
was here interrupted by the deep and sullen toll of the largest and
heaviest bell of the Convent, a sound famous in the chronicles of the
Community, for dispelling of tempests, and putting to flight demons,
but which now only announced danger, without affording any means of
warding against it.  Hastily repeating his orders, that all the
brethren should attend in the choir, arrayed for solemn procession,
the Abbot ascended to the battlements of the lofty Monastery, by his
own private staircase, and there met the Sacristan, who had been in
the act of directing the tolling of the huge bell, which fell under
his charge.

"It is the last time I shall discharge mine office, most venerable
Father and Lord," said he to the Abbot, "for yonder come the
Philistines; but I would not that the large bell of Saint Mary's
should sound for the last time, otherwise than in true and full
tone--I have been a sinful man for one of our holy profession," added
he, looking upward, "yet may I presume to say, not a bell hath sounded
out of tune from the tower of the house, while Father Philip had the
superintendence of the chime and the belfry."

The Abbot, without reply, cast his eyes towards the path, which,
winding around the mountain, descends upon Kennaquhair, from the
south-east. He beheld at a distance a cloud of dust, and heard the
neighing of many horses, while the occasional sparkle of the long line
of spears, as they came downwards into the valley, announced that the
band came thither in arms.

"Shame on my weakness!" said Abbot Eustace, dashing the tears from
his eyes; "my sight is too much dimmed to observe their motions--look,
my son Edward," for his favourite novice had again joined him, "and tell
me what ensigns they bear."

"They are Scottish men, when all is done!" exclaimed Edward--"I see
the white crosses--it may be the Western Borderers, or Fernieherst and
his clan."

"Look at the banner," said the Abbot; "tell me, what are the blazonries?"

"The arms of Scotland," said Edward, "the lion and its tressure,
quartered, as I think, with three cushions--Can it be the royal
standard?"

"Alas! no," said the Abbot, "it is that of the Earl of Murray. He hath
assumed with his new conquest the badge of the valiant Randolph, and
hath dropt from his hereditary coat the bend which indicates his own base
birth--would to God he may not have blotted it also from his memory, and
aim as well at possessing the name, as the power, of a king."

"At least, my father," said Edward, "he will secure us from the violence
of the Southron."

"Ay, my son, as the shepherd secures a silly lamb from the wolf, which
he destines in due time to his own banquet. Oh my son, evil days are
on us! A breach has been made in the walls of our sanctuary--thy
brother hath fallen from the faith. Such news brought my last secret
intelligence--Murray hath already spoken of rewarding his services
with the hand of Mary Avenel."

"Of Mary Avenel!" said the novice, tottering towards and grasping hold
of one of the carved pinnacles which adorned the proud battlement.

"Ay, of Mary Avenel, my son, who has also abjured the faith of her
fathers. Weep not, my Edward, weep not, my beloved son! or weep for
their apostasy, and not for their union--Bless God, who hath called
thee to himself, out of the tents of wickedness; but for the grace of
Our Lady and Saint Benedict, thou also hadst been a castaway."

"I endeavour, my father," said Edward, "I endeavour to forget; but what
I would now blot from my memory has been the thought of all my former
life--Murray dare not forward a match so unequal in birth."

"He dares do what suits his purpose--The Castle of Avenel is strong,
and needs a good castellan, devoted to his service; as for the
difference of their birth, he will mind it no more than he would mind
defacing the natural regularity of the ground, were it necessary he
should erect upon it military lines and intrenchments. But do not
droop for that--awaken thy soul within thee, my son. Think you part
with a vain vision, an idle dream, nursed in solitude and inaction.--I
weep not, yet what am I now like to lose?--Look at these towers, where
saints dwelt, and where heroes have been buried--Think that I, so
briefly called to preside over the pious flock, which has dwelt here
since the first light of Christianity, may be this day written down
the last father of this holy community--Come, let us descend, and meet
our fate. I see them approach near to the village."

The Abbot descended, the novice cast a glance around him; yet the
sense of the danger impending over the stately structure, with which
he was now united, was unable to banish the recollection of Mary
Ayenel.--"His brother's bride!" he pulled the cowl over his face, and
followed his Superior.

The whole bells of the Abbey now added their peal to the death-toll of
the largest which had so long sounded. The monks wept and prayed as
they got themselves into the order of their procession for the last
time, as seemed but too probable.

"It is well our Father Boniface hath retired to the inland," said Father
Philip; "he could never have put over this day--it would have broken
his heart!"

"God be with the soul of Abbot Ingelram!" said old Father Nicholas,
"there were no such doings in his days.--They say we are to be put
forth of the cloisters; and how I am to live any where else than where
I have lived for these seventy years, I wot not--the best is, that I
have not long to live any where."

A few moments after this the great gate of the Abbey was flung open,
and the procession moved slowly forward from beneath its huge and
richly-adorned gateway. Cross and banner, pix and chalice, shrines
containing relics, and censers steaming with incense, preceded and
were intermingled with the long and solemn array of the brotherhood,
in their long black gowns and cowls, with their white scapularies
hanging over them, the various officers of the convent each displaying
his proper badge of office. In the centre of the procession came the
Abbot, surrounded and supported by his chief assistants. He was
dressed in his habit of high solemnity, and appeared as much
unconcerned as if he had been taking his usual part in some ordinary
ceremony. After him came the inferior persons of the convent; the
novices in their albs or white dresses, and the lay brethren
distinguished by their beards, which were seldom worn by the Fathers.
Women and children, mixed with a few men, came in the rear, bewailing
the apprehended desolation of their ancient sanctuary. They moved,
however, in order, and restrained the marks of their sorrow to a low
wailing sound, which rather mingled with than interrupted the measured
chant of the monks.

In this order the procession entered the market-place of the village
of Kennaquhair, which was then, as now, distinguished by an ancient
cross of curious workmanship, the gift of some former monarch of
Scotland. Close by the cross, of much greater antiquity, and scarcely
less honoured, was an immensely large oak-tree, which perhaps had
witnessed the worship of the Druids, ere the stately Monastery to
which it adjoined had raised its spires in honour of the Christian
faith. Like the Bentang-tree of the African villages, or the
Plaistow-oak mentioned in White's Natural History of Selborne, this
tree was the rendezvous of the villagers, and regarded with peculiar
veneration; a feeling common to most nations, and which perhaps may be
traced up to the remote period when the patriarch feasted the angels
under the oak at Mamre. [Footnote: It is scarcely necessary to say,
that in Melrose, the prototype of Kennaquhair, no such oak ever
existed.]

The monks formed themselves each in their due place around the cross,
while under the ruins of the aged tree crowded the old and the feeble,
with others who felt the common alarm. When they had thus arranged
themselves, there was a deep and solemn pause. The monks stilled their
chant, the lay populace hushed their lamentations, and all awaited in
terror and silence the arrival of those heretical forces, whom they
had been so long taught to regard with fear and trembling.

A distant trampling was at length heard, and the glance of spears was
seen to shine through the trees above the village. The sounds
increased, and became more thick, one close continuous rushing sound,
in which the tread of hoofs was mingled with the ringing of armour.
The horsemen soon appeared at the principal entrance which leads into
the irregular square or market-place which forms the centre of the
village. They entered two by two, slowly, and in the greatest order.
The van continued to move on, riding round the open spaoe, until they
had attained the utmost point, and then turning their horses' heads to
the street, stood fast; their companions followed in the same order,
until the whole market-place was closely surrounded with soldiers; and
the files who followed, making the same manoeuvre, formed an inner
line within those who had first arrived, until the place was begirt
with a quadruple file of horsemen closely drawn up. There was now a
pause, of which the Abbot availed himself, by commanding the
brotherhood to raise the solemn chant _De profundis clamavi_. He
looked around the armed ranks, to see what impression the solemn
sounds made on them. All were silent, but the brows of some had an
expression of contempt, and almost all the rest bore a look of
indifference; their course had been too long decided to permit past
feelings of enthusiasm to be anew awakened by a procession or by a
hymn.


"Their hearts are hardened," said the Abbot to himself in dejection,
but not in despair; "it remains to see whether those of their leaders
are equally obdurate."

The leaders, in the meanwhile, were advancing slowly, and Murray, with
Morton, rode in deep conversation before a chosen band of their most
distinguished followers, amongst whom came Halbert Glendinning. But
the preacher Henry Warden, who, upon leaving the Monastery, had
instantly joined them, was the only person admitted to their
conference.

"You are determined, then," said Morton to Murray, "to give the
heiress of Avenel, with all her pretensions, to this nameless and
obscure young man?"

"Hath not Warden told you," said Murray, "that they have been bred
together, and are lovers from their youth upward?"

"And that they are both," said Warden, "by means which may be almost
termed miraculous, rescued from the delusions of Rome, and brought
within the pale of the true church. My residence at Glendearg hath
made me well acquainted with these things. Ill would it beseem my
habit and my calling, to thrust myself into match-making and giving in
marriage, but worse were it in me to see your lordships do needless
wrong to the feelings which are proper to our nature, and which, being
indulged honestly and under the restraints of religion, become a
pledge of domestic quiet here, and future happiness in a better world.
I say, that you will do ill to rend those ties asunder, and to give
this maiden to the kinsman of Lord Morton, though Lord Morton's
kinsman he be."

"These are fair reasons, my Lord of Murray," said Morton, "why you
should refuse me so simple a boon as to bestow this silly damsel upon
young Bennygask. Speak out plainly, my lord; say you would rather see
the Castle of Avenel in the hands of one who owes his name and existence
solely to your favour, than in the power of a Douglas, and of my
kinsman."

"My Lord of Morton," said Murray, "I have done nothing in this matter
which should aggrieve you. This young man Glendinning has done me good
service, and may do me more. My promise was in some degree passed to
him, and that while Julian Avenel was alive, when aught beside the
maiden's lily hand would have been hard to come by; whereas, you never
thought of such an alliance for your kinsman, till you saw Julian lie
dead yonder on the field, and knew his land to be a waif free to the
first who could seize it. Come, come, my lord, you do less than
justice to your gallant kinsman, in wishing him a bride bred up under
the milk-pail; for this girl is a peasant wench in all but the
accident of birth. I thought you had more deep respect for the honour
of the Douglasses."

"The honour of the Douglasses is safe in my keeping," answered Morton,
haughtily; "that of other ancient families may suffer as well as the name
of Avenel, if rustics are to be matched with the blood of our ancient
barons."

"This is but idle talking," answered Lord Murray; "in times like these,
we must look to men and not to pedigrees. Hay was but a rustic before
the battle of Loncarty--the bloody yoke actually dragged the plough ere
it was emblazoned on a crest by the herald. Times of action make princes
into peasants, and boors into barons. All families have sprung from one
mean man; and it is well if they have never degenerated from his virtue
who raised them first from obscurity."

"My Lord of Murray will please to except the house of Douglas," said
Morton, haughtily; "men have seen it in the tree, but never in the
sapling--have seen it in the stream, but never in the fountain.

[Footnote: The late excellent and laborious antiquary, Mr. George
Chalmers, has rebuked the vaunt of the House of Douglas, or rather of
Hume of Godscroft, their historian, but with less than his wonted
accuracy. In the first volume of his Caledonia, he quotes the passage
in Godscroft for the purpose of confuting it.

The historian (of the Douglasses) cries out, "We do not know them in
the fountain, but in the stream; not in the root, but in the stem; for
we know not which is the mean man that did rise above the vulgar."
This assumption Mr. Chalmers conceives ill-timed, and alleges, that if
the historian had attended more to research than to declamation, he
might easily have seen the first mean man of this renowned family.
This he alleges to have been one Theobaldus Flammaticus, or Theobald
the Fleming, to whom Arnold, Abbot of Kelso, between the year 1147 and
1160, granted certain lands on Douglas water, by a deed which Mr.
Chalmers conceives to be the first link of the chain of title-deeds to
Douglasdale. Hence, he says, the family must renounce their family
domain, or acknowledge this obscure Fleming as their ancestor.
Theobald the Fleming, it is acknowledged, did not himself assume the
name of Douglas; "but," says the antiquary, "his son William, who
inherited his estate, called himself, and was named by others, De
Duglas;" and he refers to the deeds in which he is so designed. Mr.
Chalmers' full argument may be found in the first volume of his
Caledonia, p. 579.

This proposition is one which a Scotsman will admit unwillingly, and
only upon undeniable testimony: and as it is liable to strong grounds
of challenge, the present author, with all the respect to Mr. Chalmers
which his zealous and effectual researches merit, is not unwilling to
take this opportunity to state some plausible grounds for doubting
that Theobaldus Flammaticus was either the father of the first William
de Douglas, or in the slightest degree connected with the Douglas
family.

It must first be observed, that there is no reason whatever for
concluding Theobaldus Flammaticus to be the father of William de
Douglas, except that they both held lands upon the small river of
Douglas; and that there are two strong presumptions to the contrary.
For, first, the father being named Fleming, there seems no good reason
why the son should have assumed a different designation: secondly,
there does not occur a single instance of the name of Theobald during
the long line of the Douglas pedigree, an omission very unlikely to
take place had the original father of the race been so called. These
are secondary considerations indeed; but they are important, in so far
as they exclude any support of Mr. Chalmers' system, except from the
point which he has rather assumed than proved, namely, that the lands
granted to Theobald the Fleming were the same which were granted to
William de Douglas, and which constituted the original domain of which
we find this powerful family lords.

Now, it happens, singularly enough, that the lands granted by the
Abbot of Kelso to Theobaldus Flammaticus are not the same of which
William de Douglas was in possession. Nay, it would appear, from
comparing the charter granted to Theobaldus Flammaticus, that, though
situated on the water of Douglas, they never made a part of the barony
of that name, and therefore cannot be the same with those held by
William de Douglas in the succeeding generation. But if William de
Douglas did not succeed Theobaldus Flammaticus, there is no more
reason for holding these two persons to be father and son than if they
had lived in different provinces; and we are still as far from having
discovered the first mean man of the Douglas family as Hume of
Godscroft was in the 16th century. We leave the question to
antiquaries and genealogists.]

In the earliest of our Scottish annals, the Black Douglas was powerful
and distinguished as now."

"I bend to the honours of the house of Douglas," said Murray, somewhat
ironically; "I am conscious we of the Royal House have little right to
compete with them in dignity--What though we have worn crowns and
carried sceptres for a few generations, if our genealogy moves no
farther back than to the humble _Alanus Dapifer!"_

[Footnote: To atone to the memory of the learned and indefatigable
Chalmers for having ventured to impeach his genealogical proposition
concerning the descent of the Douglasses, we are bound to render him
our grateful thanks for the felicitous light which he has thrown on
that of the House of Stewart, still more important to Scottish
history.

The acute pen of Lord Hailes, which, like the spear of Ithuriel,
conjured so many shadows from Scottish history, had dismissed among
the rest those of Banquo and Fleance, the rejection of which fables
left the illustrious family of Stewart without an ancestor beyond
Walter the son of Allan, who is alluded to in the text. The researches
of our late learned antiquary detected in this Walter, the descendant
of Allan, the son of Flaald, who obtained from William the Conqueror
the Castle of Oswestry in Shropshire, and was the father of an
illustrious line of English nobles, by his first son, William, and by
his second son, Walter, the progenitor of the royal family of
Stewart.]

Morton's cheek reddened as he was about to reply; but Henry Warden
availed himself of the liberty which the Protestant clergy long
possessed, and exerted it to interrupt a discussion which was becoming
too eager and personal to be friendly.

"My lords," he said, "I must be bold in discharging the duty of my
Master. It is a shame and scandal to hear two nobles, whose hands have
been so forward in the work of reformation, fall into discord about
such vain follies as now occupy your thoughts. Bethink you how long
you have thought with one mind, seen with one eye, heard with one ear,
confirmed by your union the congregation of the Church, appalled by
your joint authority the congregation of Anti-Christ; and will you now
fall into discord, about an old decayed castle and a few barren hills,
about the loves and likings of an humble spearman, and a damsel bred
in the same obscurity, or about the still vainer questions of idle
genealogy?"

"The good man hath spoken right, noble Douglas," said Murray, reaching
him his hand, "our union is too essential to the good cause to be
broken off upon such idle terms of dissension. I am fixed to gratify
Glendinning in this matter--my promise is passed. The wars, in which I
have had my share, have made many a family miserable; I will at least
try if I may not make one happy. There are maids and manors enow in
Scotland.--I promise you, my noble ally, that young Bennygask shall be
richly wived."

"My lord," said Warden, "you speak nobly, and like a Christian. Alas!
this is a land of hatred and bloodshed--let us not chase from thence
the few traces that remain of gentle and domestic love.--And be not
too eager for wealth to thy noble kinsman, my Lord of Morton, seeing
contentment in the marriage state no way depends on it."

"If you allude to my family misfortune," said Morton, whose Countess,
wedded by him for her estate and honours, was insane in her mind, "the
habit you wear, and the liberty, or rather license, of your profession,
protect you from my resentment."

"Alas! my lord," replied Warden, "how quick and sensitive is our
self-love! When pressing forward in our high calling, we point out the
errors of the Sovereign, who praises our boldness more than the noble
Morton?  But touch we upon his own sore, which most needs lancing, and
he shrinks from the faithful chirurgeon in fear and impatient anger!"

"Enough of this, good and reverend sir," said Murray; "you transgress
the prudence yourself recommended even now.--We are now close upon the
village, and the proud Abbot is come forth at the head of his hive. Thou
hast pleaded well for him, Warden, otherwise I had taken this occasion to
pull down the nest, and chase away the rooks."

"Nay, but do not so," said Warden; "this William Allan, whom they call
the Abbot Eustatius, is a man whose misfortunes would more prejudice
our cause than his prosperity. You cannot inflict more than he will
endure; and the more that he is made to bear, the higher will be the
influence of his talents and his courage. In his conventual throne he
will be but coldly looked on--disliked, it may be, and envied. But
turn his crucifix of gold into a crucifix of wood--let him travel
through the land, an oppressed and impoverished man, and his patience,
his eloquence, and learning, will win more hearts from the good cause,
than all the mitred abbots of Scotland have been able to make prey of
during the last hundred years."

"Tush! tush! man," said Morton, "the revenues of the Halidome will
bring more men, spears, and horses, into the field in one day, than his
preaching in a whole lifetime. These are not the days of Peter the
Hermit, when monks could march armies from England to Jerusalem; but gold
and good deeds will still do as much or more than ever. Had Julian Avenel
had but a score or two more men this morning, Sir John Foster had not
missed a worse welcome. I say, confiscating the monk's revenues is
drawing his fang-teeth."

"We will surely lay him under contribution," said Murray; "and,
moreover, if he desires to remain in his Abbey, he will do well to
produce Piercie Shafton."

As he thus spoke, they entered the market-place, distinguished by
their complete armour and their lofty plumes, as well as by the number
of followers bearing their colours and badges. Both these powerful
nobles, but more especially Murray, so nearly allied to the crown, had
at that time a retinue and household not much inferior to that of
Scottish royalty. As they advanced into the market-place, a
pursuivant, pressing forward from their train, addressed the monks in
these words:--"The Abbot of Saint Mary's is commanded to appear before
the Earl of Murray."

"The Abbot of Saint Mary's," said Eustace, "is, in the patrimony of his
Convent, superior to every temporal lord. Let the Earl of Murray, if he
seeks him, come himself to his presence."

On receiving this answer, Murray smiled scornfully, and, dismounting
from his lofty saddle, he advanced, accompanied by Morton, and
followed by others, to the body of monks assembled around the cross.
There was an appearance of shrinking among them at the approach of the
heretic lord, so dreaded and so powerful. But the Abbot, casting on
them a glance of rebuke and encouragement, stepped forth from their
ranks like a courageous leader, when he sees that his personal valour
must be displayed to revive the drooping courage of his followers.
"Lord James Stewart," he said, "or Earl of Murray, if that be thy
title, I, Eustatius, Abbot of Saint Mary's, demand by what right you
have filled our peaceful village, and surrounded our brethren, with
these bands of armed men? If hospitality is sought, we have never
refused it to courteous asking--if violence be meant against peaceful
churchmen, let us know at once the pretext and the object?"

"Sir Abbot," said Murray, "your language would better have become
another age, and a presence inferior to ours. We come not here to
reply to your interrogations, but to demand of you why you have broken
the peace, collecting your vassals in arms, and convocating the
Queen's lieges, whereby many men have been slain, and much trouble,
perchance breach of amity with England, is likely to arise?"

"_Lupus in fabula_," answered the Abbot, scornfully. "The wolf
accused the sheep of muddying the stream when he drank in it above
her--but it served as a pretext for devouring her. Convocate the
Queen's lieges! I did so to defend the Queen's land against
foreigners. I did but my duty; and I regret I had not the means to do
it more effectually."

"And was it also a part of your duty to receive and harbour the Queen
of England's rebel and traitor; and to inflame a war betwixt England and
Scotland?" said Murray.

"In my younger days, my lord," answered the Abbot, with the same
intrepidity, "a war with England was no such dreaded matter; and not
merely a mitred abbot, bound by his rule to show hospitality and
afford sanctuary to all, but the poorest Scottish peasant, would have
been ashamed to have pleaded fear of England as the reason for
shutting his door against a persecuted exile. But in those olden days,
the English seldom saw the face of a Scottish nobleman, save through
the bars of his visor."

"Monk!" said the Earl of Morton, sternly, "this insolence will little
avail thee; the days are gone by when Rome's priests were permitted to
brave noblemen with impunity. Give us up this Piercie Shafton, or by my
father's crest I will set thy Abbey in a bright flame!"

"And if thou dost, Lord of Morton, its ruins will tumble above the tombs
of thine own ancestors. Be the issue as God wills, the Abbot of Saint
Mary's gives up no one whom he hath promised to protect."

"Abbot!" said Murray, "bethink thee ere we are driven to deal roughly
--the hands of these men," he said, pointing to the soldiers, "will make
wild work among shrines and cells, if we are compelled to undertake a
search for this Englishman."

"Ye shall not need," said a voice from the crowd; and, advancing
gracefully before the Earls, the Euphuist flung from him the mantle in
which he was muffled. "Via the cloud that shadowed Shafton!" said he;
"behold, my lords, the Knight of Wilverton, who spares you the guilt
of violence and sacrilege."

"I protest before God and man against any infraction of the privileges
of this house," said the Abbot, "by an attempt to impose violent hands
upon the person of this noble knight. If there be yet spirit in a
Scottish Parliament, we will make you hear of this elsewhere, my
lords!"

"Spare your threats," said Murray; "it may be, my purpose with Sir
Piercie Shafton is not such as thou dost suppose--Attach him,
pursuivant, as our prisoner, rescue or no rescue."

"I yield myself," said the Euphuist, "reserving my right to defy my
Lord of Murray and my Lord of Morton to single duel, even as one
gentleman may demand satisfaction of another."

"You shall not want those who will answer your challenge, Sir Knight,"
replied Morton, "without aspiring to men above thine own degree."

"And where am I to find these superlative champions," said the English
knight, "whose blood runs more pure than that of Piercie Shafton?"

"Here is a flight for you, my lord!" said Murray.

"As ever was flown by a wild-goose," said Stawarth Bolton, who had
now approached to the front of the party.

"Who dared to say that word?" said the Euphuist, his face crimson with
rage.

"Tut! man," said Bolton, "make the best of it, thy mother's father was
but a tailor, old Overstitch of Holderness--Why, what! because thou
art a misproud bird, and despiseth thine own natural lineage, and
rufflest in unpaid silks and velvets, and keepest company with
gallants and cutters, must we lose our memory for that? Thy mother,
Moll Overstitch, was the prettiest wench in those parts--she was
wedded by wild Shafton of Wilverton, who men say, was akin to the
Piercie on the wrong side of the blanket."

"Help the knight to some strong waters," said Morton; "he hath fallen
from such a height, that he is stunned with the tumble."

In fact, Sir Piercie Shafton looked like a man stricken by a
thunderbolt, while, notwithstanding the seriousness of the scene
hitherto, no one of those present, not even the Abbot himself, could
refrain from laughing at the rueful and mortified expression of his
face.

"Laugh on," he said at length, "laugh on, my masters," shrugging his
shoulders; "it is not for me to be offended--yet would I know full
fain from that squire who is laughing with the loudest, how he had
discovered this unhappy blot in an otherwise spotless lineage, and for
what purpose he hath made it known?"

"_I_ make it known?" said Halbert Glendinning, in
astonishment,--for to him this pathetic appeal was made,--"I never
heard the thing till this moment."

[Footnote: The contrivance of provoking the irritable vanity of Sir
Piercie Shafton, by presenting him with a bodkin, indicative of his
descent from a tailor, is borrowed from a German romance, by the
celebrated Tieck, called Das Peter Manchem, _i. e._ The Dwarf
Peter. The being who gives name to the tale, is the Burg-geist, or
castle spectre, of a German family, whom he aids with his counsel, as
he defends their castle by his supernatural power. But the Dwarf Peter
is so unfortunate an adviser, that all his counsels, though producing
success in the immediate results, are in the issue attended with
mishap and with guilt. The youthful baron, the owner of the haunted
castle, falls in love with a maiden, the daughter of a neighbouring
count, a man of great pride, who refuses him the hand of the young
lady, on account of his own superiority of descent. The lover,
repulsed and affronted, returns to take counsel with the Dwarf Peter,
how he may silence the count, and obtain the victory in the argument,
the next time they enter on the topic of pedigree.  The dwarf gives
his patron or pupil a horse-shoe, instructing him to give it to the
count when he is next giving himself superior airs on the subject of
his family. It has the effect accordingly. The count, understanding it
as an allusion to a misalliance of one of his ancestors with the
daughter of a blacksmith, is thrown into a dreadful passion with the
young lover, the consequences of which are the seduction of the young
lady, and the slaughter of her father.

If we suppose the dwarf to represent the corrupt part of human
nature,--that "law in our members which wars against the law of our
minds,"--the work forms an ingenious allegory.]

"Why, did not that old rude soldier learn it from thee?" said the
knight, in increasing amazement.

"Not I, by Heaven!" said Bolton; "I never saw the youth in my life
before."

"But you _have_ seen him ere now, my worthy master," said Dame
Glendinning, bursting in her turn from the crowd. "My son, this is
Stawarth Bolton, he to whom we owe life, and the means of preserving
it--if he be a prisoner, as seems most likely, use thine interest with
these noble lords to be kind to the widow's friend."

"What, my Dame of the Glen!" said Bolton, "thy brow is more withered,
as well as mine, since we met last, but thy tongue holds the touch
better than my arm. This boy of thine gave me the foil sorely this
morning.  The Brown Varlet has turned as stout a trooper as I
prophesied; and where is White Head?"

"Alas!" said the mother, looking down, "Edward has taken orders, and
become a monk of this Abbey."

"A monk and a soldier!--Evil trades both, my good dame. Better have
made one a good master fashioner, like old Overstitch, of Holderness.
I sighed when I envied you the two bonny children, but I sigh not now
to call either the monk or the soldier mine own. The soldier dies in
the field, the monk scarce lives in the cloister."

"My dearest mother," said Halbert, "where is Edward--can I not speak
with him?"

"He has just left us for the present," said Father Philip, "upon a
message from the Lord Abbot."

"And Mary, my dearest mother?" said Halbert.--Mary Avenel was not far
distant, and the three were soon withdrawn from the crowd, to hear and
relate their various chances of fortune.

While the subordinate personages thus disposed of themselves, the
Abbot held serious discussion with the two Earls, and, partly yielding
to their demands, partly defending himself with skill and eloquence,
was enabled to make a composition for his Convent, which left it
provisionally in no worse situation than before. The Earls were the
more reluctant to drive matters to extremity, since he protested, that
if urged beyond what his conscience would comply with, he would throw
the whole lands of the Monastery into the Queen of Scotland's hands,
to be disposed of at her pleasure. This would not have answered the
views of the Earls, who were contented, for the time, with a moderate
sacrifice of money and lands.  Matters being so far settled, the Abbot
became anxious for the fate of Sir Piercie Shafton, and implored mercy
in his behalf.

"He is a coxcomb," he said, "my lords, but he is a generous, though a
vain fool; and it is my firm belief you have this day done him more pain
than if you had run a poniard into him."

"Run a needle into him you mean, Abbot," said the Earl of Morton;
"by mine honour, I thought this grandson of a fashioner of doublets was
descended from a crowned head at least!"

"I hold with the Abbot," said Murray; "there were little honour in
surrendering him to Elizabeth, but he shall be sent where he can do
her no injury. Our pursuivant and Bolton shall escort him to Dunbar,
and ship him off for Flanders.--But soft, here he comes, and leading a
female, as I think."

"Lords and others," said the English knight with great solemnity,
"make way for the Lady of Piercie Shafton--a secret which I listed not
to make known, till fate, which hath betrayed what I vainly strove to
conceal, makes me less desirous to hide that which I now announce to
you."

"It is Mysie Happer, the Miller's daughter, on my life!" said Tibb
Tacket. "I thought the pride of these Piercies would have a fa'."

"It is indeed the lovely Mysinda," said the knight, "whose merits
towards her devoted servant deserved higher rank than he had to bestow."

"I suspect, though," said Murray, "that we should not have heard of
the Miller's daughter being made a lady, had not the knight proved to be
the grandson of a tailor."

"My lord," said Piercie Shafton, "it is poor valour to strike him that
cannot smite again; and I hope you will consider what is due to a
prisoner by the law of arms, and say nothing more on this odious
subject. When I am once more mine own man, I will find a new road to
dignity."

"_Shape_ one, I presume," said the Earl of Morton.

"Nay, Douglas, you will drive him mad,"--said Murray; "besides, we
have other matter in hand--I must see Warden wed Glendinning with Mary
Avenel, and put him in possession of his wife's castle without delay. It
will be best done ere our forces leave these parts."

"And I," said the Miller, "have the like grist to grind; for I hope some
one of the good fathers will wed my wench with her gay bridegroom."

"It needs not," said Shafton; "the ceremonial hath been solemnly
performed."

"It will not be the worse of another bolting," said the Miller; "it is
always best to be sure, as I say when I chance to take multure twice
from the same meal-sack."

"Stave the miller off him," said Murray, "or he will worry him dead.
The Abbot, my lord, offers us the hospitality of the Convent; I move
we should repair hither, Sir Piercie and all of us. I must learn to
know the Maid of Avenel--to-morrow I must act as her father--All
Scotland shall see how Murray can reward a faithful servant."

Mary Avenel and her lover avoided meeting the Abbot, and took up their
temporary abode in a house of the village, where next day their hands
were united by the Protestant preacher in presence of the two Earls.
On the same day Piercie Shafton and his bride departed, under an
escort which was to conduct him to the sea-side, and see him embark
for the Low Countries.  Early on the following morning the bands of
the Earls were under march to the Castle of Avenel, to invest the
young bridegroom with the property of his wife, which was surrendered
to them without opposition.

But not without those omens which seemed to mark every remarkable
event which befell the fated family, did Mary take possession of the
ancient castle of her forefathers. The same warlike form which had
appeared more than once at Glendearg, was seen by Tibb Tacket and
Martin, who returned with their young mistress to partake her altered
fortunes. It glided before the cavalcade as they advanced upon the
long causeway, paused at each drawbridge, and flourished its hand, as
in triumph, as it disappeared under the gloomy archway, which was
surmounted by the insignia of the house of Avenel. The two trusty
servants made their vision only known to Dame Glendinning, who, with
much pride of heart, had accompanied her son to see him take his rank
among the barons of the land. "Oh, my dear bairn!" she exclaimed, when
she heard the tale, "the castle is a grand place to be sure, but I
wish ye dinna a' desire to be back in the quiet braes of Glendearg
before the play be played out." But this natural reflection, springing
from maternal anxiety, was soon forgotten amid the busy and pleasing
task of examining and admiring the new habitation of her son.

While these affairs were passing, Edward had hidden himself and his
sorrows in the paternal Tower of Glendearg, where every object was
full of matter for bitter reflection. The Abbot's kindness had
despatched him thither upon pretence of placing some papers belonging
to the Abbey in safety and secrecy; but in reality to prevent his
witnessing the triumph of his brother. Through the deserted
apartments, the scene of so many bitter reflections, the unhappy youth
stalked like a discontented ghost, conjuring up around him at every
step new subjects for sorrow and for self-torment.  Impatient, at
length, of the state of irritation and agonized recollection in which
he found himself, he rushed out and walked hastily up the glen, as if
to shake off the load which hung upon his mind. The sun was setting
when he reached the entrance of Corri-nan-shian, and the recollection
of what he had seen when he last visited that haunted ravine, burst on
his mind. He was in a humour, however, rather to seek out danger than
to avoid it.

"I will face this mystic being," he said; "she foretold the fate which
has wrapt me in this dress,--I will know whether she has aught else to
tell me of a life which cannot but be miserable."

He failed not to see the White Spirit seated by her accustomed haunt,
and singing in her usual low and sweet tone. While she sung, she
seemed to look with sorrow on her golden zone, which was now
diminished to the fineness of a silken thread.

  "Fare thee well, thou Holly green,
  Thou shall seldom now be seen,
  With all thy glittering garlands bending,
  As to greet my slow descending,
  Startling the bewilder'd hind.
  Who sees thee wave without a wind.

  "Farewell, Fountain! now not long
  Shalt thou murmur to my song,
  While thy crystal bubbles glancing,
  Keep the time in mystic dancing,
  Rise and swell, are burst and lost,
  Like mortal schemes by fortune crost.

  "The knot of fate at length is tied,
  The Churl is Lord, the Maid is bride.
  Vainly did my magic sleight
  Send the lover from her sight;
  Wither bush, and perish well,
  Fall'n is lofty Avenel!"

The vision seemed to weep while she sung; and the words impressed on
Edward a melancholy belief, that the alliance of Mary with his brother
might be fatal to them both.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here terminates the First Part of the Benedictine's Manuscript. I have
in vain endeavoured to ascertain the precise period of the story, as
the dates cannot be exactly reconciled with those of the most
accredited histories.  But it is astonishing how careless the writers
of Utopia are upon these important subjects. I observe that the
learned Mr. Laurence Templeton, in his late publication entitled
IVANHOE, has not only blessed the bed of Edward the Confessor with an
offspring unknown to history, with sundry other solecisms of the same
kind, but has inverted the order of nature, and feasted his swine with
acorns in the midst of summer. All that can be alleged by the warmest
admirer of this author amounts to this,--that the circumstances
objected to are just as true as the rest of the story; which appears
to me (more especially in the matter of the acorns) to be a very
imperfect defence, and that the author will do well to profit by
Captain Absolute's advice to his servant, and never tell him more lies
than are indispensably necessary.

                End of THE MONASTERY.





